<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>

    <title>Ancient DNA and the European Neolithic</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:7a42176f-8084-4cc5-b941-35f2c3610079" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>

  


<link href="../calibreHtmlOutBasicCss.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

</head>
<body>

<div class="calibreMeta">
  <div class="calibreMetaTitle">
  
  
    
    <h1>
      <a href="../../0uxpbel6.html">Ancient DNA and the European Neolithic
</a>
    </h1>
    
    
  
  </div>
  <div class="calibreMetaAuthor">
    Alasdair Whittle;Joshua Pollard;Susan Greaney;

  </div>
</div>

<div class="calibreMain">

  <div class="calibreEbookContent">
    
      <div class="calibreEbNavTop">
        
          <a href="15_Chapter09.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
        

        
          <a href="17_Chapter11.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
        
      </div>
    

    
<div id="Chapter10" class="calibre2">
<p class="chapnum" id="ch10"><a id="page_123"></a><span class="italic">Chapter 10</span></p>
<p class="linec"/>
<p class="chaptitle">The genetics of the inhabitants of Neolithic Britain: a review</p>
<p class="chapaut" id="ch10-1"><span class="italic1">Selina Brace and Tom Booth</span></p>
<p class="noindenth"><span class="italic">This chapter aims to review studies of the genetics of the inhabitants of Mesolithic and Neolithic Britain from the late 5th to the end of the 3rd millennium cal BC. We lay out the current thinking on the genetic ancestries and population history of Mesolithic and Neolithic continental Europe, then home in on Britain. We discuss the likely origins of Neolithic migrations into Britain and outline the difficulties in determining likely source populations. We also address the issue of admixture, focusing on interactions amongst incoming groups, their descendants and the local Mesolithic-derived populations of Britain. We discuss the different proxies for population size and genetic insularity, namely runs of homozygosity/heterozygosity and identity-by-descent, and suggest that the large genetic shift observed in Britain at the beginning of the 4th millennium cal BC may be associated with low population size in Late Mesolithic Britain. We also provide a summary of close genetic relatives that have thus far been identified at Neolithic funerary sites and what these relatives suggest about funerary behaviour and social organisation. Our concluding section assesses the genetic data from the 3rd millennium cal BC, which whilst limited, indicate substantial population continuity from the preceding millennium. We conclude that while the genetic shifts that bookend the Neolithic period in Britain are similarly large-scale, closer analysis reveals differences that illustrate different dynamics of genetic change.</span></p>
<p class="h">INTRODUCTION</p>
<p class="noindent">The published main text of archaeogenetics papers is often limited in terms of both words and citations, and therefore there is rarely space to explore the full interpretative potential of the results. In addition, new results from relevant ancient populations and new analyses will often throw a different light on previously published results. Archaeogeneticists do not typically revisit their publications, even in light of relevant new studies, probably due to the volume and speed at which they are published. Therefore, attempts to review publications, with a fuller discursive account of explanations and taking into consideration new data and analyses, will increasingly be necessary to keep models of ancient archaeogenetics up to date. In this paper, we will attempt to review studies of the genetics of Mesolithic and Neolithic Britain in the late 5th into the 4th millennium cal BC, and what we have learned since the first study reporting data from Neolithic Britain (Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018).</p>
<p class="h"><a id="page_124"></a>POPULATION HISTORY OF MESOLITHIC AND NEOLITHIC CONTINENTAL EUROPE</p>
<p class="noindent">Mesolithic populations from across Europe carry a variety of diverse genetic ancestries. Genetic ancestries reflect the extent to which individuals or groups of people share recent ancestors, and while labelling of genetic ancestry groups is useful for discussion, variation across groups is continuous, and these do not represent simple bounded categories. The main type of ancestries, predominant in western, central and southern Europe, are often referred to as ‘Western European Hunter-Gatherer’ ancestries (WHG), although they have sometimes been referred to as ‘Villabruna’ ancestries, after the earliest site where these ancestries have been found (Skoglund <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2012; Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2014; Fu <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2016; Yang and Fu 2018). Some Mesolithic groups in Europe also carry ancestries deriving from Palaeolithic hunter-gatherer groups who resettled Europe after the Last Glacial Maximum, from <span class="italic">c</span>. 16,000 cal BC and were associated with Magdalenian artefacts (Jones <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2015; Fu <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2016; Olalde <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019; Villalba-Mouco <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019). This category of ancestries is referred to as ‘GoyetQ2’ (previously ‘El Miron’), again named after the oldest burial where this ancestry has been found, at the cave site of Goyet in present-day Belgium. ‘GoyetQ2’ ancestries have only ever been observed as a minority ancestry component of Mesolithic groups in Europe. The strongest signal of this ancestry is in south-west Europe, particularly parts of Iberia, although it has also been identified as a component of ancestries in Mesolithic populations of western and northern continental Europe (Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Villalba-Mouco <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019; Brunel <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020; Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020).</p>
<p class="indent">A third category of genetic ancestries is found in Mesolithic populations of eastern Europe, which are referred to as Eastern European Hunter-Gatherer ancestries (EHG). Unlike GoyetQ2 ancestries, EHG ancestries can form a majority or even exclusive component of Mesolithic groups in eastern Europe, particularly around areas in present-day Ukraine and the eastern Baltic (Yang and Fu 2018). Later Mesolithic populations of northern Scandinavia comprise a characteristic mix of WHG and EHG ancestries that is sometimes referred to as ‘Scandinavian hunter-gatherer’ (SHG) ancestries (Günther <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018). Different concentrations of these ancestries across Europe during the Mesolithic mean there is a general south-west–north-east cline in these three ancestries across Europe through the Mesolithic. Some individuals and groups in south-east Europe carry partial ancestries that predominate in Anatolia, the same ancestries that become dominant across Europe through the Neolithic (Mathieson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018; Lazaridis <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). This is presumably because of interactions between hunter-gatherers from south-east Europe and adjacent regions of Anatolia. These general clines of Mesolithic ancestries fluctuate through time (Allentoft <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022).</p>
<p class="indent">It is also possible to discriminate between WHG-related ancestries from different parts of Europe, particularly where there are individuals from which we have high quality (high coverage) data. The genetics of the Mesolithic skeleton from La Brana, Iberia, are distinguishable from those of Loschbour, from present-day Luxembourg, because of the skeleton from La Brana harbouring a minority proportion of GoyetQ2-related ancestries (Villalba-Mouco <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019). But Loschbour is also somewhat distinguishable from KO1, an early Neolithic individual from south-east Europe who exclusively carries WHG-related ancestry (Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020). The KO1 and Loschbour genomes are often taken as proxies <a id="page_125"></a>for Mesolithic-derived ancestries from south-east and western Europe respectively, but such a view is potentially naive to the complexities of population fluctuations in Mesolithic Europe, as well as anachronistic in using genomes dispersed over thousands of years.</p>
<p class="indent">Between 7000 cal BC and 4000 cal BC, groups carrying Early European Farmer (EEF)-related ancestries from Neolithic Anatolia slowly dispersed across Europe via two routes: along the Mediterranean coast into the western Mediterranean region and along the Danube into central Europe (Haak <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2015; Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2015). This dichotomous model of human dispersal is a simplified model and almost certainly does not capture the complexity of what actually happened, which probably involved complex patterns of dispersals in several directions. These groups interacted and mixed with populations carrying ancestries derived from local Mesolithic groups, although in most cases the Mesolithic-associated ancestry component comprised a variable minority of whole ancestry over the long term (Skoglund and Mathieson 2018). Different histories of regional interactions between incoming and local populations and their descendants across Europe meant that these broad ‘Mediterranean’ and ‘Danubian’ dispersal routes produced two genetically discernible populations, largely distinguished by the amount and type of ancestries they carried from the various Mesolithic populations (Haak <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2015; Olalde <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2015; 2019; Mathieson <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2018; Allentoft <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). These two groups can be separated by the Rhine (Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020). Generally (although not universally), particularly up until the 5th millennium cal BC, Neolithic groups from west of the Rhine are descended from the Mediterranean dispersals and are defined by higher levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestry more generally and a greater genetic affinity to the Loschbour genome than the KO1 genome. Certain Neolithic groups from Iberia can be further distinguished from other aspects of the Mediterranean dispersals by excess Mesolithic-derived ancestry as well as specific ancestries related to GoyetQ2. The Mediterranean dispersals are characterised by successive episodes of local admixture with Mesolithic-descended groups producing complex patterns of variation in genetic ancestry.</p>
<p class="indent">By contrast, Neolithic groups east of the Rhine associated with the Danubian expansions show lower levels of admixture with Mesolithic-derived groups and share greater genetic affinities with KO1 than with the Loschbour genome. The Danubian dispersal has subsequently been characterised as involving some admixture between populations carrying EEF-related ancestry and local Mesolithic-descended populations in south-east Europe in the 7th millennium cal BC, followed by relatively rapid expansion across the loess soils into parts of central and western Europe during the 6th millennium cal BC, with little subsequent admixture with populations derived from local Mesolithic groups (Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020; Allentoft <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022).</p>
<p class="indent">The trend for a ‘Middle Neolithic hunter-gatherer resurgence’ involving a sudden uptick in levels of Mesolithic-derived genetic ancestries in the late 5th and early 4th millennia cal BC has been noted in disparate parts of continental Europe (Haak <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2015; Lipson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2017; Mathieson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018; Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018; 2019). This phenomenon is more common amongst populations in western Europe, usually descended from Mediterranean dispersals, but is also apparent in populations who inhabited parts of Europe east of the Rhine (Bollongino <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2013; Haak <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2015; Lipson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2017; Allentoft <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022). There are two broad explanations for this resurgence of Mesolithic-derived ancestry, namely 1) local Mesolithic populations and early farmers carrying EEF-related ancestries co-existed <a id="page_126"></a>in parallel, sometimes for thousands of years, before merging more completely; and 2) a new group of people carrying EEF ancestry moved into the area and admixed with local groups. This new population would have to have harboured higher levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestries.</p>
<p class="indent">Methods that estimate the number of generations since there was admixture with groups wholly carrying certain kinds of genetic ancestries, such as DATES or ALDER, can be used to try to distinguish between these two scenarios (Loh <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2013; Narasimhan <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019; Furtwängler <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020; Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020). DNA is inherited in segments, but recombination that occurs every generation means that these segments are split apart and become shorter. DATES and ALDER can estimate whether Mesolithic-derived ancestry was a result of recent admixture, indicated by long segments of DNA associated with these ancestries across the genome, or distant admixture, in which case the Mesolithic-derived admixture will consist of shorter, broken-up segments. If Middle Neolithic resurgence of Mesolithic-derived ancestries is as a result of recent mergers between groups carrying EEF ancestry and groups wholly carrying Mesolithic-derived ancestries, then the signal of admixture should be recent. If the upsurge in WHG ancestry is due to admixture with a group with EEF ancestry that simply harboured higher levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestries, the signal of admixture will be many generations ago. One weakness of these methods is that they give a single date estimate with a confidence interval and do not accommodate multiple episodes of ancestral admixture. If there had been several episodes of admixture with individuals carrying wholly Mesolithic-derived ancestry in an individual’s or group’s ancestral history, then this method would provide an average of the timing of admixture. Application of this method to various Neolithic populations from Europe has found evidence for both processes (Bollongino <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2013; Lipson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2017; Brunel <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020; Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020). In some places, such as Blatterhöhle Cave in Westphalia, in north-west Germany, the WHG ancestry resurgence is related to recent admixture between populations carrying EEF-related ancestry and Mesolithic-derived groups, while in other regions, such as northern France, there seems to have been admixture between two groups carrying EEF-related ancestry but disparate levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestry (Bollongino <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2013; Lipson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2017; Brunel <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020; Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020).</p>
<p class="h">EARLY GENETIC STUDIES OF NEOLITHIC BRITAIN</p>
<p class="noindent">The first studies that reported specifically on the genetics of people in Neolithic Britain were those of Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2018), Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019) and Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019). All three studies reached similar conclusions: that from <span class="italic">c</span>. 4000 cal BC people in Britain predominantly carried EEF-related genetic ancestries. A substantial minority component of their ancestry, usually around 25%, but with a range of between 20 and 40%, was derived from WHG genetic ancestries, which predominated in much of western, central and southern Mesolithic Europe. They all found that the Neolithic populations from Britain were predominantly descended from Neolithic groups who had dispersed along the Mediterranean. However, a minority component of the ancestries derived from groups who had dispersed along the Danube into central Europe, and who were ultimately descended from people associated with <span class="italic">Linearbandkeramik</span> (LBK) societies.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_127"></a>Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019) highlighted that all burials they investigated from societies who built megalithic tombs from Britain, Ireland and Scandinavia showed some level of ancestry derived from these Mediterranean dispersals. The 5th millennium cal BC also saw the expansion of populations derived from Neolithic groups from the western Mediterranean into areas that had been previously inhabited by Neolithic populations descended from the Danubian migrations (Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2016; 2020; Beau <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2017). These expansions and interactions probably led to the mixed Mediterranean/Danubian ancestral signatures in Neolithic populations of Britain. They concluded that this may indicate that the 5th millennium cal BC was a time when expansions of Neolithic populations carrying Mediterranean-derived ancestry out of western Europe, perhaps via maritime routes, may have influenced the development of megalith-building societies across north-west Europe (Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019).</p>
<p class="indent">Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019), Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2018) and Sanchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019) all discuss the affinities of Neolithic populations of Britain to Mediterranean dispersals of people through comparisons to Neolithic populations from Iberia. Unfortunately, this was read by some researchers as arguing that groups had migrated directly to Britain from the Iberian peninsula into Britain (Thomas 2022). Iberian Neolithic genomes were chosen for comparison in all of these studies because they were (at the time) the highest quality and most abundant genomes associated with the Mediterranean Neolithic dispersals. The comparison of British and Iberian Neolithic genomes was useful in determining whether Neolithic populations of Britain shared greater affinities with the Mediterranean or Danubian dispersals of groups. In fact, both Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2018) and Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019) found that the Neolithic population of Britain shared greater genetic affinities with Neolithic individuals from southern France than Iberia, but as the genomes available from southern France were fewer in number and of lower quality, they were sub-optimal to use as a source population for the British Neolithic. The more probable scenario was that Neolithic groups from Britain and Iberia were both distantly descended from groups of people who had dispersed into the western Mediterranean and split, with one group moving into northern parts of France and another moving south-west into Iberia. This point is made by Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019) but it is easy to see how it could have been obscured by the repeated references to Neolithic Iberia. (See also Sheridan and Whittle, this volume, for a discussion of the ‘Iberian’ question.)</p>
<p class="indent">Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019) estimated the excess levels of Mesolithic-derived admixture in Neolithic Britain in part by comparing Neolithic populations of Britain against Neolithic groups from Iberia dating to the 5th and 4th millennia cal BC. When earlier populations from the Iberian peninsula who existed before the Middle Neolithic ‘resurgence’ of Mesolithic-derived ancestries were used, they detected no additional admixture in the small number of Neolithic samples from Wales, around 10% additional admixture in samples from England and around 20% in Scotland. This fitted one of their other observations: that there was a significant south-west–north-east cline in Mesolithic-derived ancestries, with north-east Britain (particularly Orkney), and to a lesser extent south-east Britain, showing slightly higher levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestries. When they used samples from Iberia in the 4th millennium cal BC, there was no additional Mesolithic-derived admixture in any region of Britain. They reasoned that the 5th millennium cal BC Neolithic samples from Iberia probably provided the most appropriate estimates, as samples dating to <a id="page_128"></a>4th millennium cal BC were too late to have been plausible sources for Neolithic Britain and the samples dating to the 5th millennium cal BC both predated the Neolithic in Britain and were more likely to have been closer to the Mediterranean dispersals of people that were ancestral to both groups.</p>
<p class="indent">Using DATES software (Narasimhan <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019), Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019) attempted to determine whether this additional Mesolithic-derived admixture was due to groups of Neolithic migrants and their descendants having children with local groups derived from the Mesolithic population in Britain, or was a result of additional admixture in continental Europe. This analysis found evidence for early and more recent Mesolithic admixture in Britain. However, the only samples with evidence for recent admixture all came from western Scotland. All the other Mesolithic-derived admixture detected was estimated to have occurred dozens of generations previously, before populations carrying the EEF-related ancestries had arrived in Britain. This result will represent an average of Mesolithic-derived ancestry admixture over the preceding few generations, but suggested that any excess Mesolithic-derived ancestries were largely already present in migrating populations. Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019) therefore concluded that the differences in levels of Mesolithic-derived admixture across Neolithic Britain were more likely to be down to different source populations with slightly different levels of Mesolithic-derived admixture having entered different parts of Britain.</p>
<p class="h">ORIGINS OF NEOLITHIC MIGRATIONS INTO BRITAIN</p>
<p class="noindent">It is clear from the aDNA data that Neolithic populations of Britain were probably the descendants of people who had migrated from north-west continental Europe, most probably proximal regions of France (Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018; Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Scheib <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019). However, narrowing down the precise areas from where the Neolithic migrants to Britain had come, and determining whether this involved single or multiple sources, has been difficult to determine genetically, even with new data from Neolithic north-west continental Europe (Brunel <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020; Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020). This is in part because of an increasingly complex picture of the genetics of north-west Europe, involving repeated population migrations, expansions and admixtures (Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020). Available samples for comparison also limit our ability to narrow down likely sources. Some sampled populations are from pertinent regions of north-west Europe but belong to the wrong sort of time period to represent plausibly the source of migrations to Britain. Some groups are from the right sort of time period, but not the correct place. As is often the case with ancient DNA, we have to triangulate a likely origin by investigating levels of genetic similarity to available samples, using them as proxies for other unsampled populations, even if they are inappropriately situated or anachronistic, and using the results to act as a guide in developing one or a series of plausible scenarios.</p>
<p class="indent">There are a few ways in which we can investigate different aspects of genetic similarity between populations of Neolithic Britain and continental Europe to try to get a sense of where migrations into Britain originated. The most reliable involves simply looking at which Neolithic populations are most genetically similar to one another, which translates <a id="page_129"></a>into those groups being more likely to share recent ancestry. This seems straightforward, but can be affected by technical issues related to methods of data generation and analysis. For instance, the relatively distinctive ancestries deriving from Mesolithic populations of Europe and Early European Farmers mean that they can overwhelm any direct relationship between populations.</p>
<p class="indent">Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2020) studied the genetics of Neolithic populations from variable regions of France and found that Neolithic individuals from Britain showed some affinities with Neolithic groups of the 5th millennium cal BC from southern France, the Atlantic Coast, Normandy and the Paris basin. As in Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2019), they detected possible regional variation across Britain and Ireland, suggesting migrations from at least two sources, with Ireland and western Britain showing more influence from Atlantic sources whereas eastern Britain was probably more influenced by migrations from Normandy, the Paris basin and the western Mediterranean. However, these conclusions have been challenged by Ariano <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022) who found that Neolithic populations of both Britain and Ireland were genetically close to one another, and probably had similar sources. The extent to which this challenges suggestions of regional variation by Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019) and Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2020) will depend on how differentiated Neolithic populations of north-west Europe were.</p>
<p class="indent">Another way of assessing likely source populations for migrations into Britain is through the consideration of paternal (Y-chromosome haplogroup) and maternal lineages (mitochondrial (Mt) haplogroup). Consideration of these loci with respect to connections between populations has to be done with care for a number of reasons. Firstly, these loci represent only a small proportion of each individual’s genetic ancestry: a restricted overall proportion of an individual’s ancestors. Genome-wide data are considered more robust, particularly for problems of sample size, as they allow for an individual to be treated as representative of a sample of their genetic ancestors, representing possibly hundreds of people whose remains have not survived into the archaeological record. These arguments do not apply to uniparental loci, and sample size issues are highly relevant.</p>
<p class="indent">Secondly, Y and Mt haplogroups are prone to founder effects and drift, whereby an offshoot of a particular population may by chance carry different proportions of particular lineages. If these two populations become relatively isolated from one another, these differences can become exacerbated through genetic drift, where lineages that were at low frequency in the source population become more common in the derived group over time. Finally, given there is some evidence that certain types of highly visible Neolithic funerary monuments across Europe were primarily used for the burial of people belonging to specific lineages, particularly paternal lineages (Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Cassidy <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020; Fowler <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022), there is a danger that there will be a bias towards these groups and the true diversity of paternal lineages of Neolithic people who lived in the area will be hidden.</p>
<p class="indent">There is less diversity in paternal than maternal lineages amongst Neolithic populations of Europe and so it is easier to look at paternal lineages when assessing connections between populations. As it happens, Neolithic paternal lineages in Britain are particularly non-diverse, exclusively comprising derivatives of haplogroup I, usually I2a (Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018; Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). Temporally and geographically proximal populations that broadly match this distribution of paternal lineages include groups who inhabited western Iberia, Atlantic and Mediterranean France <a id="page_130"></a>and western Germany in the 5th millennium cal BC (Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020). Geographically proximate Neolithic populations examined by Brunel <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2021) include sites in the Grand-Est region of eastern France and a range of sites in southern France (although it should be noted that paternal lineages could not be obtained in a high proportion of samples used in this study). Interestingly, populations sampled from two sites in northern France, Gurgy ‘les Noisats’ in the Paris basin and Fleury-sur-Orne in Normandy show none of the paternal lineages that have been found so far in Neolithic Britain and Ireland, although any inferences taken from these observations regarding the origins of the Neolithic population of Britain have to be heavily caveated by the factors we have discussed above.</p>
<p class="h">ADMIXTURE WITH LOCAL MESOLITHIC POPULATIONS OF BRITAIN</p>
<p class="noindent">Determining the source of migrations into Britain near the beginning of the 4th millennium cal BC is not just important for understanding inward migration but also the level of admixture with Mesolithic-derived populations living in Britain. The volatility of levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestry amongst Neolithic populations of north-west continental Europe in the 4th millennium cal BC means that whichever population we choose as the likely source of migrations to Britain can change the estimate of additional admixture with Mesolithic-derived populations in Britain (Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020; Thomas 2022).</p>
<p class="indent">Thomas (2022) notes that no population dating to the 5th millennium cal BC from areas of northern France proximal to Britain studied by Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2020) consistently retains levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestry as high as what is seen in Neolithic Britain. He puts forward an alternative narrative of the Neolithic transition from Britain whereby a ‘minimal Neolithic’ is established in south-east Britain as a result of interactions between Mesolithic groups in Britain and small groups of pioneer migrants from continental Europe at the end of the 5th millennium cal BC. This minimal Neolithic sets the groundwork for subsequent substantial migrations through the first half of the 4th millennium cal BC. In this model, the small amount of excess Mesolithic-derived admixture in Neolithic Britain compared to populations from northern France studied by Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2020) may have been related to interactions that took place between incoming and local populations and their descendants at the end of the 5th millennium cal BC (Thomas 2022). The failure of this admixture to show up in the DATES analysis may be down to either methodological issues or the fact that most samples from Neolithic Britain post-date 3800 cal BC and are too distant from the admixture event for it to show up. An alternative position proposed by Thomas (2022) is that local and incoming populations did not have children with one another in this minimal Neolithic period, or at least those that did were marginal in the broader population history of Neolithic Britain.</p>
<p class="indent">The figure of Mesolithic-derived admixture which Thomas (2022) cites (around 26%) for Neolithic Britain includes samples from western Scotland that show evidence for recent admixture with Mesolithic-derived groups who lived in Britain. If we take similar figures from Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022, online table 5), the mean estimates for levels of Mesolithic-derived admixture in Britain, excluding outlier samples from western Scotland, are 22% for southern Britain (England and Wales) and 23% for northern Britain (Scotland). Even using <a id="page_131"></a>these figures, there is certainly still a step change in levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestry from regions of Neolithic France sampled by Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2020) compared to Britain, but this is in the range of 7–9%.</p>
<p class="indent">A different study that investigated ancient human genomes from different regions of Neolithic France (Brunel <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020) suggests that levels of Mesolithic-derived admixture in other populations dating to the 5th and early 4th millennia cal BC did carry levels of Mesolithic-derived admixture comparable to what we see in Neolithic populations of Britain. Specifically, around 22% of the ancestry of populations from the eastern Grand-Est region of France was derived from Mesolithic populations of Europe, while these ancestries account for around 30% of the ancestry of people from the Hauts-de-France region of northern France. It may well be that none of these studied populations represent the precise source of migrations into Britain, but variable levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestries found in populations from different parts of 5th millennium cal BC France by Brunel <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2020) and Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2020) show the volatility of levels of these ancestries in these regions. Therefore, it is reasonable to suggest that there could have been several populations in varied regions of north-west continental Europe that account for the levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestry observed in Neolithic Britain.</p>
<p class="indent">The DATES results presented in Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019) have been replicated and refined through a different method (ALDER) based on similar principles by Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2020; see also Loh <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2013). This analysis identified that the average date of admixture with Mesolithic-derived populations in the ancestral histories of people from Neolithic England and Scotland (outside the outlier individuals from western Scotland) was the late 6th millennium cal BC. In genomes from Wales, this estimate was later in the mid-5th millennium cal BC, although the reliability of this estimate may be questionable given that Neolithic genomes available from Wales show, if anything, lower levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestry than Neolithic genomes from other parts of Britain (Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019). The genomes from Wales are of lower quality and are later, dating to <span class="italic">c</span>. 3000 cal BC, and it is possible that this estimate represents a methodological ceiling.</p>
<p class="indent">Thomas (2022) argues that the fact that the results of these methods could represent a palimpsest of different admixture events means that they cannot be used to dismiss the possibility that there were early minor admixture events between incoming and local populations in Britain in the late 5th millennium cal BC. While this may be true it is difficult to see why this would result in an ALDER estimate of admixture as far back as 5000 cal BC. The late 5th millennium cal BC is so much closer in time to the individuals from which we have genetic data than 5000 cal BC is distant, that if admixture had taken place just before 4000 cal BC we would expect there to be clear tell-tale longer segments of DNA associated with Mesolithic-derived populations that would drag the ALDER estimate younger than 5000 cal BC.</p>
<p class="indent">It is not possible to test properly the minimal Neolithic narrative proposed by Thomas (2022) using the genetic data available, as the model is predicated on explaining why signatures of recent admixture with Mesolithic-derived populations in Britain may be absent from the samples available from Neolithic Britain. This is especially true if early interactions that took place as part of the minimal Neolithic did not involve incoming and local groups having children with one another. Therefore Thomas’ (2022) model does <a id="page_132"></a>present a reasonable explanation of the genetic evidence. Crellin and Harris (2020) criticise archaeogeneticists for favouring simple models to explain their data, but this is not based on an arbitrary preference; it is related to a probabilistic epistemology that is central to genetics methods. Geneticists tend to favour simple models because from a probabilistic perspective, complex models are more likely to be incorrect, as they involve more degrees of freedom, which means there are more ways in which they might be wrong. Therefore, given that there is no firm evidence for much recent admixture with Mesolithic-derived populations in Neolithic Britain and that plausible source populations in continental north-west Europe could account completely for levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestries, the minimal Neolithic phase proposed by Thomas (2022) is unnecessary to explain genetic change in Britain in the 4th millennium cal BC. Whether the archaeological evidence favours Thomas’ (2022) model over others is something that will continue to be discussed.</p>
<p class="indent">A small or negligible genetic contribution from local Mesolithic-derived groups to Neolithic populations of Britain does not necessarily translate into those groups having been marginalised or forcefully displaced by a migration ‘event’ involving sudden cross-Channel movements of absolutely large numbers of people. The conclusions presented by Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019) leave room for this process having involved small-scale movements of people over centuries. If populations carrying EEF-related ancestry and those descended from local Mesolithic populations lived largely in parallel with communities of migrants and their descendants for long periods, disparities in population size, fertility, infant mortality and survival to adulthood could all have contributed to Mesolithic-descended groups having a small or even negligible genetic legacy in the long term (Booth <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2021). Such a scenario is consistent with findings from sites such as the Coneybury Anomaly, where faunal remains suggest a meeting between a group of farmers presumably descended from continental migrants and a group of hunter-gatherers presumably descended from local Mesolithic populations (Gron <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018).</p>
<p class="h">ADMIXTURE IN WESTERN SCOTLAND</p>
<p class="noindent">Data published in Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022) further highlight the exceptional levels of excess Mesolithic-derived ancestries in burials from western Scotland, indicative of recent admixture with Mesolithic-descended populations in Britain (Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019). There are now eight Neolithic individuals showing evidence for recent admixture with local Mesolithic groups and all come from cave sites (and one shell midden) in western Scotland: Distillery Cave, Raschoille Cave, Carding Mill Bay and Ulva Cave (Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018; Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019; Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). Moreover, the dates of these individuals extend well into the first half of the 4th millennium cal BC, providing indirect evidence for communities wholly descended from Mesolithic groups persisting in western Scotland for hundreds of years after groups carrying EEF-related ancestries first arrived.</p>
<p class="indent">Other individuals buried in some of the same caves in western Scotland show levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestries that are similar to those of the Neolithic population of Britain more generally. However, so far no analysed individual from these sites shows a genetic ancestry entirely derived from local Mesolithic groups. This situation is <a id="page_133"></a>reminiscent of signatures of genetic ancestry across Britain between <span class="italic">c</span>. 2450 cal BC and <span class="italic">c</span>. 2000 cal BC when genetic ancestries of sampled burials were mostly derived from a new wave of migrants from continental Europe, but where there were sporadic occurrences of people with substantial levels of ancestry derived from local Neolithic groups (Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018; Booth <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2021; Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). The communities burying their dead in the caves of western Scotland (and depositing bodies on a shell midden there) must have lived adjacent to people descended from local Mesolithic groups for hundreds of years, but only had children with them some of the time. It is of interest that the archaeological context of two individuals showing higher Mesolithic-derived admixture from Carding Mill Bay II was a shell midden in a crevice at the foot of a cliff (Connock 1990); laying out the dead on a shell midden to allow natural decomposition through exposure is the funerary practice of Late Mesolithic groups on the Inner Hebridean island of Oronsay, a day’s sail to the south-west of Oban. This situation could chime with Mithen’s (2022) account of the beginnings of a ‘mesoneolithic’ biocultural merger in and around the islands of western Scotland, although the genetic evidence would be more consistent with his alternative ‘dual population’ model.</p>
<p class="indent">These patterns of Mesolithic-derived admixture in western Scotland have no effect on the levels of these ancestries in the rest of Neolithic Britain over the long term (Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). This means that groups in western Scotland who were admixing more extensively with local Mesolithic-derived populations must have been fairly marginal to the broader population of Neolithic Britain and either did not survive or were so small relative to the total population that they had very little impact on general genetic ancestries over the long term. This is evidence, as Thomas (2022) suggests, that similar regional persistence of Mesolithic-descended populations alongside groups carrying EEF-related ancestries could have occurred in other unsampled or under-sampled regions of Britain, but would not show up in the national-level data. However, this would mean that regional communities involved in these processes were unusual, small and marginal to other groups. The one Mesolithic genome from the 5th millennium cal BC is also from western Scotland, from a bone buried in the Cnoc Coig shell midden on the island of Oronsay. The female burial carried no EEF-related ancestry (Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019). The radiocarbon date suggests she probably died before the arrival of groups carrying EEF-related ancestries, but some overlap is possible.</p>
<p class="h">NEOLITHIC INHABITANTS OF GUERNSEY</p>
<p class="noindent">The study by Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022) also included the first Neolithic ancient genomes from the Channel Islands, specifically the island of Guernsey. These genomes provide an interesting opportunity to investigate demographic processes on a small island, as well as potentially providing some insight into the Neolithic populations of Brittany, the most likely source of any population movements into Guernsey, which in turn adds to discussion of likely proximate source population for migrations to Britain. The character of the genetics of Neolithic Brittany are unknown and may remain so to some degree due to the paucity of relevant human remains.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_134"></a>Eight individuals have been sequenced from two megalithic tombs on Guernsey: Le Déhus and The Common (Herm). The two burials from The Common are radiocarbon dated to 3646–3527 cal BC (95% confidence; 4817±28 BP; MAMS-14945) and 3954–3773 cal BC (95% confidence; 5050±29 BP; MAMS-14949; Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). Radiocarbon dating of the human bone from Le Déhus indicates that two, and potentially three, phases of deposition are represented. Three individuals date to between 4300 cal BC and 3900 cal BC. Two others are much later, dating to between 3100 cal BC and 2900 cal BC. The last sample dates to 2567–2301 cal BC (95% confidence; 3987±23 BP; SUERC-96208; marine calibrated).</p>
<p class="indent">Around 16–17% of the ancestry of samples from Le Déhus dating to the end of the 5th or beginning of the 4th millennium cal BC can be attributed to Mesolithic populations of Europe. This is also true of the samples from The Common where Mesolithic-derived ancestries are also between 16–17%. This is very similar to levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestries observed in other populations from northern France reported by Rivollat <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2020) and therefore below levels seen in Neolithic Britain. However, by the end of the 4th and beginning of the 3rd millennium cal BC Mesolithic-derived ancestries in burials at Le Déhus had risen substantially to 32–36%. The latest individual potentially dating to the second half of the 3rd millennium cal BC maintains this high level of Mesolithic-derived ancestries at 30%. It is notable that this person does not carry any ancestry derived from the migrations from the Pontic-Caspian steppe that began transforming genetic ancestries of populations in northern Europe between 3000 cal BC and 2400 cal BC (Allentoft <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2015; Haak <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2015). The radiocarbon date from this individual potentially overlaps with dates of others from Britain and continental western Europe who did carry steppe-related ancestry (Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018; Brunel <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020; Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022).</p>
<p class="indent">The contrast in levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestries amongst the Neolithic samples from Guernsey suggests that there was some resurgence of these ancestries sometime between 3500 cal BC and 3000 cal BC. As in other parts of Europe, this resurgence could be because of more extensive admixture with local Mesolithic-descended groups, or the arrival of a new population carrying EEF-related ancestries with elevated levels of Mesolithic-derived ancestries (or a mixture of both; Bollongino <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2013; Haak <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2015; Lipson <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2017; Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020). These Guernsey individuals have not been subject to ALDER or DATES analysis and so it is difficult to distinguish between these two scenarios. It seems unlikely that two populations could have lived in parallel and sustained themselves on a small island like Guernsey without reproducing with one another for several centuries. On the other hand, such a scenario could be plausible if these Mesolithic-descended groups had persisted across the Channel Islands and the admixture we see in the samples from Le Déhus was as a result of mixing with populations drawn from across the islands. This situation could have been facilitated if there had been a decline in populations carrying EEF-related ancestries on Guernsey in the late 4th millennium cal BC, something to which Neolithic populations living on small islands may have been particularly susceptible (Ariano <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022).</p>
<p class="indent">Two males sampled from Le Déhus dating to the 4300–3900 cal BC phase of deposition are 2nd–3rd-degree relatives and shared a paternal but not a maternal lineage. These two people could have been paternal first cousins, half siblings, uncle/nephew, <a id="page_135"></a>grandfather/grandson, great-uncle/great-nephew or great-grandfather/grandson. The emphasis on a paternal relationship is consistent with finds from other Neolithic megalithic tombs (Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019; Cassidy <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020; Fowler <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022).</p>
<p class="h">POPULATION SIZE AND INSULARITY IN NEOLITHIC BRITAIN</p>
<p class="noindent">Disparities in population size between incoming groups carrying EEF-related ancestries and their descendants, and local Mesolithic-derived groups, provide an irresistible way of helping to explain why EEF-related ancestries came to predominate amongst the inhabitants of so many areas of Neolithic Europe (Haak <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2015). Methods which utilise observations such as runs of homozygosity/heterozygosity assess the extent to which long stretches of the genome carry the same two genetic variants on each chromosome and provide a measure of the diversity of an individual’s gene pool (Kirin <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2010). Genetic diversity is affected by population size, with large populations maintaining higher diversity, although homozygosity/heterozygosity can also be affected by processes such as admixture, which increase genetic diversity of a population. Runs of homozygosity can be caused by processes which decrease population diversity, such as bottlenecks or inbreeding.</p>
<p class="indent">Analyses of runs of homozygosity/heterozygosity have been performed several times for Mesolithic and Neolithic populations of Europe, and generally all have indicated that levels of homozygosity were lower in Neolithic populations descended from EEF-related groups than in Mesolithic populations from similar regions (Haak <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2015; Kılınç <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2017; Lipson <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2017; Mathieson <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2018; Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019). This includes Britain, where levels of heterozygosity in the Mesolithic Cheddar Man, who dates to the late 9th millennium cal BC, were notably lower than for populations carrying EEF-related ancestries who inhabited Britain from around 4000 cal BC (Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019). The Cheddar Man genome was the only Mesolithic genome from Britain that was of a high enough quality to be able to run this type of analysis, and it may be questionable how appropriate it is to compare this Early Mesolithic individual to Neolithic genomes, which are so temporally distant. However, the suggestion that the population that inhabited Britain after 4000 cal BC was substantially larger than the one that lived before 4000 cal BC is supported by other proxies of population size (Collard <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2010; Timpson <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2014; Woodbridge <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2014).</p>
<p class="indent">When we are discussing disparities in population size, this is not just covering movements of large numbers of people, but also potentially the production of descendants over the long term. As we have discussed, there is evidence from several regions of Europe that groups carrying EEF-related ancestries often admixed in only a limited way with local Mesolithic-derived people initially, before admixing more substantially hundreds, sometimes thousands of years later (Bollongino <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2013; Lipson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2017; Mathieson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018). This pattern is to some extent necessary to explain the smaller legacy of Mesolithic-derived inhabitants over the long term. If Mesolithic-descended populations were not small and there had been substantial admixture between these groups as soon as communities carrying EEF-related ancestries arrived in the area, then when the population grew, there would already have been a substantial Mesolithic-derived component to their ancestry. <a id="page_136"></a>Moreover, in a situation where groups carrying EEF-related ancestries and Mesolithic-descended populations lived in parallel and had children infrequently, the minority long-term genetic legacy of Mesolithic-descended groups necessitates that groups carrying EEF-related ancestries grew more quickly over the same period.</p>
<p class="indent">‘Population replacement’ as used in relation to migration in archaeogenetics papers is often misunderstood as being something total and involving aggressive displacement of previous inhabitants by large numbers of migrants (Booth 2019). Population replacement is a technical term in biology which refers to a shift in genetic ancestry at a population level, of any size, with no mechanism inferred. As we have discussed above, the processes responsible for a population replacement could have involved small groups of people arriving over several hundred years. If their diet, lifestyle or culture meant that they tended to have even slightly more children who lived to adulthood than neighbouring communities, then over hundreds of years this would translate into a substantial shift (or ‘replacement’) of genetic ancestries.</p>
<p class="indent">In Neolithic Britain, the challenge is to explain why the genetic shift we see was so large compared to other regions of Europe which involved interactions between similar populations (Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019). One possibility helping to explain this pattern would be that the Late Mesolithic population of Britain was especially small or scarce in many regions of Britain. Otherwise, factors affecting fertility, infant mortality and likelihood of living to adulthood would come into play, which may suggest that Mesolithic lifestyles in Britain differed from other Mesolithic populations in regions of continental Europe. The alternative or complementary perspective is that populations carrying EEF-related ancestries had lifestyles and practices that differed from those of similar populations in continental Europe, which meant that rates of child survival to reproductive age were higher. The biological relationships found in the Hazleton North long cairn may provide one potential example of this (Fowler <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). At Hazleton there was evidence that both men and women had children with multiple partners. If this was as a result of polyamory rather than serial monogamy then this practice would have increased the fertility of men particularly, as it would have reduced the times between the birth of their children. If future analyses indicate that these sorts of practices were less common in Continental Europe, then this could be one factor explaining why levels of local Mesolithic-derived ancestry were so low amongst Neolithic groups. In addition, low population sizes, or densities, in parts of Late Mesolithic Britain and Europe more generally would mean, intentionally or not, that migrant and local groups would have found it easier to avoid each other, making it easier to explain the persistence of parallel societies of groups variably carrying EEF-related ancestries (Bollongino <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2013; Lipson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2017; Mathieson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018; Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019).</p>
<p class="indent">The only Mesolithic genome available from Britain dating to the 5th millennium cal BC, from Cnoc Coig on Oronsay, is too low quality to be analysed for metrics that might give an indication of population sizes in Late Mesolithic Britain (Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019). All other Mesolithic genomes date to the period of the Mesolithic before Britain became an island. Mesolithic hunter-gatherers of Ireland show high levels of homozygosity suggesting a relatively small endogamous population, albeit one that was able to avoid inbreeding (Cassidy <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020). It is currently not possible to assess whether a similar process could have occurred in Late Mesolithic Britain after it was separated from continental Europe.</p>
<p class="indent"><a id="page_137"></a>Another way of looking at population size and genetic insularity is through the extent to which individuals share ‘identity-by-descent (IBD)’ segments of DNA (Speidel <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Ringbauer <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2021). Rather than relying on the extent to which samples share similar individual genetic variants (alleles), this method is more powerful in examining the extent to which individuals and population share long segments of DNA that are inherited together (Speidel <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Ringbauer <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2021). Ariano <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022) used IBD-sharing amongst other analyses to investigate the population history of Neolithic Malta, but also Neolithic Europe more broadly. They found a contrast between groups descended from the Mediterranean and Danubian Neolithic dispersals, with higher IBD-sharing between populations along the Danubian route. This means that populations associated with the Danubian dispersals were much more connected genetically, suggesting there was a lot of interaction and back-migration between these groups. This seems to be less true for groups associated with Mediterranean dispersals where levels of IBD-sharing were lower. This was especially true for populations that had moved on to islands, suggesting that once Neolithic groups had moved on to an island, the sea then became a barrier to further gene flow. (See also Ariano and Bradley, this volume.)</p>
<p class="indent">The analysis of IBD-sharing amongst Neolithic populations of Britain and Ireland found that IBD-sharing was higher within groups from the western Mediterranean and northern France, as expected, but that Britain and Ireland were also substantially separated from these Continental groups (Ariano <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). This suggested that once populations carrying EEF-related ancestries moved to Britain and Ireland from Continental Europe, there was continued intermarriage across the Irish Sea, but comparatively little across the Channel. Ariano <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022) also found that IBD-sharing amongst the Neolithic population of Orkney was higher again than that observed between Neolithic populations of Britain and Ireland, suggesting that the Neolithic populations of Orkney were highly endogamous. Most published ancient genomes from Orkney date to the second half of the 4th millennium cal BC or the first half of the 3rd millennium cal BC, in the Middle–Late Neolithic, and may be quite specific to Orkney in this time period.</p>
<p class="indent">Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022) applied an analysis that used runs of homozygosity to look at changes in effective population size in Britain through later prehistory. Runs of homozygosity provide a sense of the background relatedness of a particular population, which can be translated into an effective population size, with large runs of homozygosity indicating higher interrelatedness and lower effective population size. Effective population size is not census population size (although there is a relationship between the two). Effective population size can be thought of as how many people were reproducing with one another at any one time. Examining changes in effective population size through time can provide some indication of relative changes in population size, periods of population growth or shrinkage even if it does not provide a direct idea of actual population size.</p>
<p class="indent">Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022) found that estimates of effective population size in Neolithic Britain in the 4th millennium cal BC were surprisingly low, around 4000, although with a confidence interval, which varied between around 2500 and 10,000. There is substantial uncertainty in relating effective population sizes to census size, but estimates suggest the census population should be between three and ten times the effective population size (Fernandes <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2021). This gives an estimate for the total population of Britain in the <a id="page_138"></a>4th millennium cal BC as between 12,000 and 40,000 people, although with a lower bound of 7500 and a higher bound of 100,000. These estimates are extremely broad, but generally suggest that the population of Britain in the 4th millennium cal BC was no more than 100,000 people and possibly substantially less than this.</p>
<p class="indent">There are caveats to this estimate. For instance, if our sample of Neolithic genomes was wholly or predominantly drawn from people who were closely related to each other rather than to the rest of the population, then this would give a false impression of background relatedness of the population as a whole and produce an underestimate of population size. In Ireland, close biological relatives were identified across different passage tombs, and patterns of IBD-sharing indicated that even those individuals that were not close relatives were still more related to each other than to the population of Britain and Ireland as a whole, suggesting the existence of a social stratum of closely related groups who more often were buried in passage tombs (Cassidy <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020). Fowler <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022) demonstrated that tombs could hold many close biological relatives.</p>
<p class="indent">We cannot reject the possibility that funerary treatment correlated with relatedness in Neolithic Britain to some degree and that we have so far sampled a biased sample of the population as a whole. However, Cassidy <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2020) did not observe similar patterns of relatedness in the data from Neolithic Britain as they found in the passage tombs or Ireland. While genomes sequenced from Neolithic Britain do primarily originate from tombs, the style of tomb varies considerably, and a high proportion of genomes come from cave burials, with a minority from a variety of different monumental and non-monumental contexts (Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018; Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019; Scheib <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019; Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). To argue that these effective population size estimates may be down to higher relatedness between the people that have been sampled for DNA analysis is to infer these highly related individuals could be subject to a wide variety of funerary treatments. Perhaps, as has been suggested for the Chalcolithic–Early Bronze Age period, those individuals outside of these relative groups were subject to cremation, which destroys the DNA, or other funerary treatments that left no archaeological trace (Booth 2019).</p>
<p class="h">RELATIVES IN NEOLITHIC BRITAIN</p>
<p class="noindent">The use of DNA to identify relatives in Neolithic tombs of Britain and Ireland has been discussed at length by Cassidy <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2020) and Fowler <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022). Few tombs from Britain and Ireland have had a high enough number of genomes sequenced from their occupants to be assessed for the presence of close relatives. Most tombs from which we have a decent number of genomes tend to show that a good proportion of the inhabitants were not close biological relatives (Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018; Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019; Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Cassidy <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020; Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). When close relatives are found in tombs, they are more often males rather than females and tend to be related on their paternal side suggesting that patrilineage to some extent determined who was buried in these monuments (Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Cassidy <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020; Fowler <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). As we have discussed, people buried in passage tombs in Ireland were more related to each other than the Neolithic population of the rest of Britain and Ireland. Together, all these results have been used to argue that Neolithic societies in Britain were patrilocal and practised female <a id="page_139"></a>exogamy, although these sorts of inferences rely on the (often unstated) assumption that occupants of tombs reflect cohabitants in life, which, while a reasonable argument, may not necessarily have been the case.</p>
<p class="indent">The spectacular results from Hazleton North chambered cairn, where 27 individuals out of 35 analysed from the tomb were close relatives from a five-generation genealogy provide an exception to the otherwise equivocal evidence for the role of biologically associated social ties in determining who was interred in Neolithic tombs (Fowler <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). All the men recovered from the tomb were related on their paternal sides, either biologically or through adoption and there was a distinct absence of adult female daughters, again potentially indicating a patrilocal system employing female exogamy, although other interpretations are possible. This result contrasts substantially with for instance the result from Isbister chambered tomb in Orkney where none of the seven individuals that have been sequenced so far were close biological relatives (Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018). However, all of the genomes from Isbister date to the late 4th or first half of the 3rd millennium cal BC, and so the absence of relatives may relate to the different use of tombs in Middle–Late Neolithic Orkney and the extended periods of time over which they were used.</p>
<p class="indent">Two individuals from the Fussell’s Lodge long barrow were 2nd–3rd-degree relatives and did not share a maternal lineage and so were more likely to have been paternally related (Cassidy <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020). Unfortunately, the age-at-death of these two individuals is unknown, but if the female was an adult this could disrupt the trend with respect to the absence from Neolithic tombs of adult females who were paternally related to other inhabitants. Two individuals sequenced from the Trumpington Meadows Neolithic grave in Cambridgeshire were brothers. The impression so far from the limited evidence we have from Neolithic funerary monuments in Britain is that different types of tombs or even individual tombs may have been regarded in different ways when it came to the interment of people whose social ties mapped on to biological relationships (Fowler <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022).</p>
<p class="indent">The genetic ancestry profiles of the relatives identified at Hazleton North also give us an insight into the nature of population movements in the early 4th millennium cal BC. All the relatives from the tomb had very similar genetic ancestry profiles with no significant variability in genetic ancestries derived from the Mesolithic populations of Britain. This means that individuals who are missing from the five-generation tree, but who would have contributed substantial genetic ancestry to the members whose genomes we have sequenced, would also not have had variable Mesolithic-derived ancestries. The consistency in genetic ancestries across dozens of individuals over several generations could only have occurred if migrations into Britain involved movements of groups of people who largely had children amongst themselves (Booth <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2021).</p>
<p class="indent">Genetic relatives are also notable by their paucity from Neolithic cave sites (Olalde <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2018; Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). The available data suffer in the same ways as the data from tombs; there are usually only one or two genomes available from individual sites, making assessments of overall patterns of relatedness difficult. The highest number of genomes we have from a single cave is 10 from Raschoille Cave in Oban, western Scotland. None of the individuals sampled were close biological relatives and they carried a variety of maternal and paternal lineages. Genetic relatives have, however, been identified from a cave and a shell midden in western Scotland, MacArthur Cave and Carding Mill Bay II, both also in Oban (Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). A pair of brothers or possibly a father <a id="page_140"></a>and son were identified from MacArthur Cave, while two adult females from Carding Mill Bay II were 1st-degree relatives, either sisters or a mother-daughter pair. The Carding Mill Bay II relatives shared similar elevated levels of admixture from Mesolithic-derived groups, suggesting that they were more likely to have been sisters. If these individuals were adults when they died, this would contrast with relationships observed so far in tombs where paternally related female relatives were usually absent (Cassidy <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020; Fowler <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). Unfortunately, the samples we have so far are too few to assess whether the frequency of relatives identified from these caves in western Scotland is significant.</p>
<p class="indent">A perhaps overlooked result from Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2019) was the identification of three 1st-degree relatives recovered from the Whitehawk causewayed enclosure in Brighton comprising a mother and her two sons or two brothers and their sister. The bones had come from disarticulated deposits that had been scattered across the three enclosure ditches. Skeletal representation suggested that bodies had decomposed or been defleshed elsewhere before selected bones were collected and deposited in the ditches. This finding is interesting because, unlike what has been observed in many Neolithic tombs, this deposit seems to be referencing a maternal relationship. Does this mean that different types of relationship were considered important at different monuments and matrilineal descent was emphasised at causewayed enclosures? This result may also be a strong point against theories that processes of bodily disarticulation in Neolithic chambered tombs were intended to anonymise the dead, allowing them to become part of a faceless mass of ancestors (Barber 1989). The fact that these bones were redeposited at the same site may suggest their identities in life were known to the communities handling them. Alternatively, if the disarticulated bones deposited at Whitehawk had been collected from a tomb set out in a similar way to Hazleton North, then there would have been a high chance that simply collecting a random set of bones from a single chamber would have produced bones from a series of maternal relatives (Fowler <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). Further work on assemblages of human remains from different types of monuments, but especially causewayed enclosures, is required to assess how human remains were chosen for deposition at different types of monument.</p>
<p class="indent">The sensational finding that one of the burials from the Newgrange passage tomb in Ireland, an adult male, was the product of an incestuous relationship between 1st-degree relatives has not been repeated in any sampled burials from Neolithic Britain (Cassidy <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2020). In fact, patterns of homozygosity amongst all other Neolithic burials from Britain and Ireland suggest that instances of acute inbreeding such as found at Newgrange must have been rare (Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Cassidy <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2021; Ariano <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022). Instead, observed levels of homozygosity suggest that Neolithic populations of Britain more often tried to avoid inbreeding. However, runs of homozygosity in one of the burials from the Hazleton North tomb suggested that they were the child of second or third cousins (Fowler <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022).</p>
<p class="h">BRITAIN IN THE 3RD MILLENNIUM CAL BC</p>
<p class="noindent">Compared to the increasingly complex information that we have for the genetics of Neolithic Britain in the 4th millennium cal BC, our understanding of the first half of the 3rd millennium cal BC is lacking. This is partly because we only have five genomes from outside <a id="page_141"></a>Orkney that date to this period, from Orchid Cave and Rhos Ddigre in Denbighshire, Wales; Totty Pot in Cheddar, Somerset; Bryn Yr Hen Bobl on Anglesey and Thornholme in Yorkshire (Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019; Olalde <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019; Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). Of these only two are of reasonable quality (Thornholme and Rhos Ddigre) and all but two (Totty Pot and Bryn yr Hen Bobl) date to the first quarter of the 3rd millennium cal BC. This is no surprise given the paucity of unburnt human skeletal remains available from this period.</p>
<p class="indent">All individuals show levels of EEF-related and Mesolithic-derived ancestries consistent with one another and populations who inhabited Britain from the beginning of the 4th millennium cal BC. The low number of samples means that it could be argued that these genomes may not be representative of all regions of Britain, although they do come from fairly dispersed places. Taken at face value the results suggest that there was no resurgence of Mesolithic-derived ancestries after 3000 cal BC and that there were also no substantial genetic interactions with populations outside Britain and Ireland, consistent with the conclusions of Ariano <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022) that the populations of Britain and Ireland were genetically quite insular through the Neolithic.</p>
<p class="indent">The paucity and low quality of the genomes we have from Late Neolithic Britain mean it is difficult to use the genetic evidence to address outstanding questions of whether there was a population decline in this period (Collard <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2010; Timpson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2014; Woodbridge <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2014; Downey <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2016; Colledge <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019). Figure 2b from Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2021), charting changes in effective population size in later prehistory, leaves blank the period 3000–2500 cal BC, as the data and number of genomes we have from this period are insufficient to make any strong assertions about population size. This may be something that can be addressed in future with sequencing of further Late Neolithic genomes, but also through compensating for the poor quality of existing genomes through processes such as imputation, which uses reference panels of ancient and modern human genetic variation to fill in the gaps of ancient genomes.</p>
<p class="indent">Further Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age genomes from Britain dating to 2500–2000 cal BC sequenced as part of the Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022) study continue to suggest that for large parts of this period, a population largely genetically continuous with the Neolithic population of Britain persisted alongside migrants from continental Europe and their descendants who carried steppe-related ancestries (Booth <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2021). This is apparent in the trend for individuals of this period having either no or insubstantial ancestry derived from the Neolithic population of Britain, indicating an archaeologically invisible population descended from Neolithic populations who had children with people from the visible population only infrequently. The evidence for the persistence of populations descended from the Neolithic population of Britain into the late 3rd millennium cal BC in multiple regions of Britain and their detectable, albeit small, influence on the broader genetics of Britain by the beginning of the 2nd millennium cal BC represent a point of departure of the two ‘transitions’ at the beginning and the end of the Neolithic in Britain (Olalde <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2018; Brace <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Booth <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2021; Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). Beyond headlines of ‘population replacement’, the demographic processes responsible for major changes in genetic ancestries in these periods were probably quite different.</p>
<p class="indent">Analysis by Patterson <span class="italic">et al.</span> (2022) suggests that effective population size between 2500 cal BC and 2000 cal BC was not so much larger than in the period of the Neolithic between 4000 cal BC and 3000 cal BC. With the caveats discussed above regarding <a id="page_142"></a>potential bias influencing estimates of effective population size, this suggests that population sizes in Britain from 2500–2000 cal BC were also surprisingly low. This would also mean that, like in the early 4th millennium cal BC, migrations to Britain in the second half of the 3rd millennium cal BC could have comprised small-scale movements of people who were able to expand relatively rapidly rather than rapid movements of absolutely large numbers of people. Low population sizes and densities in certain regions of Britain during prehistory may help to explain the large-scale changes in genetic ancestry that we see, in that it is easier to see how migrations and proliferation of small communities of people could have had a substantial transformative effect on genetic ancestries over the long term.</p>
<p class="indent">There are five genomes available from Neolithic Orkney dating to between 3000 cal BC and 2500 cal BC, mainly from the Isbister tomb. Their genetic ancestries are very similar to those of Neolithic populations from the rest of Britain, but as we have discussed above, they show a high degree of genetic insularity suggesting that once groups carrying EEF-related ancestries arrived, they largely had children amongst themselves and did not intermarry much with communities on the mainland. Another way besides endogamy in which the genetic homozygosity of the population of Orkney could be explained is through population decline, and perhaps this pattern in Orkney is indicative of a wider trend of population contraction across Britain as a whole. However, given that we see similar patterns of homozygosity and genetic insularity in other Neolithic societies on small islands, the most plausible explanation for now is that the high homozygosity observed in populations of the Orcadian Neolithic reflects patterns of interaction within an insular context.</p>
<p class="indent">The latest genome from Isbister dates to 2572–2348 cal BC (95% confidence; 3962±29 BP; SUERC-68721), overlapping considerably with the first appearance of populations carrying steppe-related ancestries in Britain including mainland Scotland (Olalde <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2018). Recent genetic analysis of human remains dating to <span class="italic">c</span>. 1700–1300 cal BC, in the Middle Bronze Age, from the Links of Noltland settlement in Orkney suggests that while there was a major turnover in genetic ancestry as a result of the arrival of individuals carrying steppe-related ancestries, there was a major retention of paternal lineages from the Neolithic (Dulias <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022). Short of Orkney having been flooded by women from mainland Scotland, this result suggests that genetic ancestry change in Orkney through the Bronze Age was more likely to have been mediated by marriage alliances between Beaker-using groups descended from Continental migrants on the mainland and local populations descended from Neolithic groups on Orkney. The observation that this kind of large-scale whole ancestry change could be mediated by socio-political manoeuvring means that similar processes could have been responsible for large-scale ancestry changes across mainland Britain, although producing slightly different results, and counters the urge to necessarily see this sort of change in terms of invasion and conquest (Booth <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2021).</p>
<p class="h">CONCLUSION</p>
<p class="noindent">Publication of new data and repeated analysis of published genomes have meant that our understanding of the genetics of Britain from the beginning of the 4th millennium cal BC has been refined considerably since the first data were published in 2018, although many questions still remain. It is clear that groups carrying EEF-related ancestry began moving <a id="page_143"></a>into Britain around the beginning of the 4th millennium cal BC. These migrants were themselves descended from long-term dispersals of people into the western Mediterranean from Anatolia. Movements into Britain occurred around the same time as a secondary expansion of people carrying this ancestry derived from western Mediterranean, extending as far as Scandinavia. It is likely that these migrations into Britain took place over several hundred years, but once these new groups and their descendants became established there was little, if any, further intermarriage with groups from continental Europe, although marriage networks were maintained across the Irish Sea. There is little evidence from most parts of Britain for admixture between these incomers and their descendants and populations derived from the local Mesolithic inhabitants outside western Scotland, where there is indirect evidence for Mesolithic-descended populations having persisted for several generations after the first continental migrants arrived. This does not mean that local Mesolithic populations were overwhelmed by a sudden large-scale wave of migrants from continental Europe; it could mean small populations inhabited many regions of Britain in the late 5th millennium cal BC and that migrant-descended communities may have grown comparatively rapidly. Patterns of relatives in tombs indicate that burial in these contexts was often based on patrilineality, but matrilineality also played a part and rules of deposition may have varied across different tombs and in different monumental and non-monumental contexts (Fowler <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2021). Lack of quality genomes means our view of the first half of the 3rd millennium cal BC is hazy, although what we do have indicates substantial population continuity from the 4th millennium cal BC. Populations of Orkney in the late 4th and early 3rd millennia cal BC were particularly endogamous, which might provide important context for Middle–Late Neolithic cultural developments on these islands. There is indirect evidence that Neolithic-descended populations persisted in several regions of Britain alongside new continental migrants carrying steppe-related ancestries through the second half of the 3rd millennium cal BC and had a detectable, albeit small, influence on overall genetic ancestries over the long term. While genetic ancestry changes at the beginning and the end of the Neolithic in Britain were large and may have involved small local populations, the dynamics of the transformation of genetic ancestries are different, indicating distinct processes. Future data and analyses will undoubtedly continue to refine our view of the Neolithic inhabitants of Britain.</p>
<p class="h">REFERENCES</p>
<p class="bib">Allentoft, M.E., Sikora, M., Refoyo-Martinez, A., Irving-Pease, E.K., Fischer, A., Barrie, W. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022. Population genomics of Stone Age Eurasia. <span class="italic">bioRxiv</span> preprint, 1–71. <span class="shyphen"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.05.04.490594">https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.05.04.490594</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Allentoft, M.E., Sikora, M., Sjögren, K.-G., Rasmussen, S., Rasmussen, M., Stenderup, J. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2015. Population genomics of Bronze Age Eurasia’. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 522(7555), 167–72.</p>
<p class="bib">Ariano, B., Mattiangeli, V., Breslin, E.M., Parkinson, E.W., McLaughlin, T.R., Thompson, J.E. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022. Ancient Maltese genomes and the genetic geography of Neolithic Europe. <span class="italic">Current Biology: CB</span>, <span class="shyphen"><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2022.04.069">http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2022.04.069</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Barber, J. 1989. Isbister, Quanterness and the Point of Cott: the formulation and testing of some middle range theories. In J. Barrett and I. Kinnes (eds), <span class="italic">The archaeology of context in the Neolithic and Bronze Age: recent trends</span>, 57–62. Sheffield: J.R. Collis Publications.</p>
<p class="bib"><a id="page_144"></a>Beau, A., Rivollat, M., Réveillas, H., Pemonge, M.-H., Mendisco, F., Thomas, Y., Lefranc, P. and Deguilloux, M.-F. 2017. Multi-scale Ancient DNA analyses confirm the western origin of Michelsberg farmers and document probable practices of human sacrifice. <span class="italic">PloS One</span> 12(7), e0179742</p>
<p class="bib">Bollongino, R., Nehlich, O., Richards, M.P., Orschiedt, J., Thomas, M.G., Sell, C., Fajkosová, Z., Powell, A. and Burger, J. 2013. 2000 years of parallel societies in Stone Age central Europe. <span class="italic">Science</span> 342(6157), 479–81.</p>
<p class="bib">Booth, T.J. 2019. A stranger in a strange land: a perspective on archaeological responses to the palaeogenetic revolution from an archaeologist working amongst palaeogeneticists. <span class="italic">World Archaeology</span> 51, 586–601.</p>
<p class="bib">Booth, T.J., Brück, J., Brace, S., and Barnes, I. 2021. Tales from the Supplementary Information: ancestry change in Chalcolithic–Early Bronze Age Britain was gradual with varied kinship organization. <span class="italic">Cambridge Archaeological Journal</span> 31(3), 379–400.</p>
<p class="bib">Brace, S., Diekmann, Y., Booth, T.J., van Dorp, L., Faltyskova, Z., Rohland, N. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019. Ancient genomes indicate population replacement in early Neolithic Britain. <span class="italic">Nature Ecology &amp; Evolution</span> 3(5), 765–71.</p>
<p class="bib">Brunel, S., Bennett, E.A., Cardin, L., Garraud, D., Barrand Emam, H., Beylier, A. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020. Ancient genomes from present-day France unveil 7,000 years of its demographic history. <span class="italic">Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America</span> 117(23), 12791–8.</p>
<p class="bib">Cassidy, L.M., Maoldúin, R.Ó., Kador, T., Lynch, A., Jones, C., Woodman, P.C. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020. A dynastic elite in monumental Neolithic society. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 582(7812), 384–8.</p>
<p class="bib">Collard, M., Edinborough, K., Shennan, S., and Thomas, M.G. 2010. Radiocarbon evidence indicates that migrants introduced farming to Britain. <span class="italic">Journal of Archaeological Science</span> 37(4), 866–70.</p>
<p class="bib">Colledge, S., Conolly, J., Crema, E., and Shennan, S. 2019. Neolithic population crash in northwest Europe associated with agricultural crisis. <span class="italic">Quaternary Research</span> 92(3), 686–707.</p>
<p class="bib">Connock, K.D. 1990. A <span class="italic">Shell Midden</span> at Carding Mill Bay, Oban. <span class="italic">Scottish Archaeological Review</span> 7, 74–6.</p>
<p class="bib">Crellin, R.J. and Harris, O.J.T. 2020. Beyond binaries. Interrogating ancient DNA. <span class="italic">Archaeological Dialogues</span> 27, 37–56.</p>
<p class="bib">Downey, S.S., Haas, W.R., Jr, and Shennan, S.J. 2016. European Neolithic societies showed early warning signals of population collapse. <span class="italic">Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America</span> 113(35), 9751–6.</p>
<p class="bib">Dulias, K., Foody, M.G.B., Justeau, P., Silva, M., Martiniano, R., Oteo-García, G. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022. Ancient DNA at the edge of the world: continental immigration and the persistence of Neolithic male lineages in Bronze Age Orkney’. <span class="italic">Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America</span> 119(8). <span class="shyphen"><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2108001119">http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2108001119</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Fernandes, D.M., Sirak, K.A., Ringbauer, H., Sedig, J., Rohland, N., Cheronet, O. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2021. A genetic history of the Pre-Contact Caribbean. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 590(7844), 103–10.</p>
<p class="bib">Fowler, C., Olalde, I., Cummings, V., Armit, I., Büster, L., Cuthbert, S., Rohland, N., Cheronet, O., Pinhasi, R. and Reich, D. 2022. A high-resolution picture of kinship practices in an early Neolithic tomb. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 601(7894), 584–7.</p>
<p class="bib">Fu, Q., Posth, C., Hajdinjak, M., Petr, M., Mallick, S., Fernandes, D. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2016. The genetic history of Ice Age Europe. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 534(7606), 200–205.</p>
<p class="bib">Furtwängler, A., Rohrlach, A.B., Lamnidis, T.C., Papac, L., Neumann, G.U., Siebke, I. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020. Ancient genomes reveal social and genetic structure of Late Neolithic Switzerland. <span class="italic">Nature Communications</span> 11(1), 1915.</p>
<p class="bib">Gron, K.J., Fernandez-Dominiguez, E., Gröcke, D.R., Montgomery, J., Nowell, G.M., Patterson, W.P. and Rowley-Conwy, P. 2018. A meeting in the forest: hunters and farmers at the Coneybury ‘Anomaly’, Wiltshire. <span class="italic">Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society</span> 84, 111–44.</p>
<p class="bib"><a id="page_145"></a>Günther, T., Malmström, H., Svensson, E.M., Omrak, A., Sánchez-Quinto, F., Kılınç, G.M. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2018. Population genomics of Mesolithic Scandinavia: investigating early postglacial migration routes and high-latitude adaptation. <span class="italic">PLoS Biology</span> 16(1), e2003703.</p>
<p class="bib">Haak, W., Lazaridis, I., Patterson, N., Rohland, N., Mallick, S., Llamas, B. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2015. Massive migration from the steppe was a source for Indo-European languages in Europe. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 522(7555), 207–11.</p>
<p class="bib">Jones, E.R., Gonzalez-Fortes, G., Connell, S., Siska, V., Eriksson, A., Martiniano, R. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2015. Upper Palaeolithic genomes reveal deep roots of modern Eurasians. <span class="italic">Nature Communications</span> 6, 8912.</p>
<p class="bib">Kirin, M., McQuillan, R., Franklin, C.S., Campbell, H., McKeigue, P.M., and Wilson, J.F. 2010. Genomic runs of homozygosity record population history and consanguinity. <span class="italic">PloS One</span> 5(11), e13996.</p>
<p class="bib">Kılınç, G.M., Koptekin, D., Atakuman, Ç., Sümer, A.P., Dönertaş, H.M., Yaka, R. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2017. Archaeogenomic analysis of the first steps of Neolithization in Anatolia and the Aegean. <span class="italic">Proceedings of The Royal Society, Biological Sciences</span> <span class="shyphen"><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2017.2064">http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2017.2064</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Lazaridis, I., Alpaslan-Roodenberg, S., Acar, A., Açıkkol, A., Agelarakis, A., Aghikyan, L. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022) The genetic history of the Southern Arc: a bridge between west Asia and Europe’. <span class="italic">Science</span> 377(6609), eabm4247.</p>
<p class="bib">Lipson, M., Szécsényi-Nagy, A., Mallick, S., Pósa, A., Stégmár, B., Keerl, V. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2017. Parallel palaeogenomic transects reveal complex genetic history of early European farmers. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 551(7680), 368–72.</p>
<p class="bib">Loh, P.-R., Lipson, M., Patterson, N., Moorjani, P., Pickrell, J.K., Reich, D., and Berger, B. 2013. Inferring admixture histories of human populations using linkage disequilibrium. <span class="italic">Genetics</span> 193(4), 1233–54.</p>
<p class="bib">Mathieson, I., Alpaslan-Roodenberg, S., Posth, C., Szécsényi-Nagy, A., Rohland, N., Mallick, S. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2018. The genomic history of southeastern Europe. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 555(7695), 197–203.</p>
<p class="bib">Mithen, S. 2022. How long was the mesolithic–neolithic overlap in western scotland? evidence from the 4th millennium BC on the Isle of Islay and the evaluation of three scenarios for Mesolithic–Neolithic interaction. <span class="italic">Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society</span>, First View, 1–25. <span class="shyphen"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1017/ppr.2022.3">https://doi.org/10.1017/ppr.2022.3</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Narasimhan, V.M., Patterson, N., Moorjani, P., Rohland, N., Bernardos, R., Mallick, S. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019. The formation of human populations in south and central Asia. <span class="italic">Science</span> 365(6457). <span class="shyphen"><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aat7487">http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aat7487</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Olalde, I., Allentoft, M.E., Sánchez-Quinto, F., Santpere, G., Chiang, C.W.K., DeGiorgio, M. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2014. Derived immune and ancestral pigmentation alleles in a 7,000-year-old Mesolithic European. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 507(7491), 225–8.</p>
<p class="bib">Olalde, I., Brace, S., Allentoft, M.E., Armit, I., Kristiansen, K., Booth, T. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2018. The Beaker phenomenon and the genomic transformation of northwest Europe. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 555(7695), 190–6.</p>
<p class="bib">Olalde, I., Mallick, S., Patterson, N., Rohland, N., Villalba-Mouco, V., Silva, M. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019. The genomic history of the Iberian Peninsula over the past 8000 years. <span class="italic">Science</span> 363(6432), 1230–4.</p>
<p class="bib">Olalde, I., Schroeder, H., Sandoval-Velasco, M., Vinner, L., Lobón, I., Ramirez, O. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2015. A common genetic origin for early farmers from Mediterranean Cardial and central European LBK cultures. <span class="italic">Molecular Biology and Evolution</span> msv181. <span class="shyphen"><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msv181">http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msv181</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Patterson, N., Isakov, M., Booth, T., Büster, L., Fischer, C.-E., Olalde, I. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022. Large-scale migration into Britain during the Middle to Late Bronze Age. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 601(7894), 588–94.</p>
<p class="bib">Ringbauer, H., Novembre, J., and Steinrücken, M. 2021. Parental relatedness through time revealed by runs of homozygosity in ancient DNA. <span class="italic">Nature Communications</span> 12(1), 5425.</p>
<p class="bib">Rivollat, M., Jeong, C., Schiffels, S., Küçükkalıpçı, İ., Pemonge, M.-H., Rohrlach, A.B. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020. Ancient genome-wide DNA from France highlights the complexity of interactions between Mesolithic hunter-gatherers and Neolithic farmers. <span class="italic">Science Advances</span> 6(22), eaaz5344.</p>
<p class="bib"><a id="page_146"></a>Rivollat, M., Réveillas, H., Mendisco, F., Pemonge, M.-H., Justeau, P., Couture, C., Lefranc, P., Féliu, C. and Deguilloux, M.-F. 2016. Ancient mitochondrial DNA from the Middle Neolithic necropolis of Obernai extends the genetic influence of the LBK to west of the Rhine. <span class="italic">American Journal of Physical Anthropology</span> 161(3), 522–9.</p>
<p class="bib">Sánchez-Quinto, F., Malmström, H., Fraser, M., Girdland-Flink, L., Svensson, E.M., Simões, L.G. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019. Megalithic tombs in western and northern Neolithic Europe were linked to a kindred society. <span class="italic">Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America</span> 116(19), 9469–74.</p>
<p class="bib">Scheib, C.L., Hui, R., D’Atanasio, E., Wohns, A.W., Inskip, S.A., Rose, A. <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019. East Anglian early Neolithic monument burial linked to contemporary megaliths. <span class="italic">Annals of Human Biology</span> 46(2), 145–9.</p>
<p class="bib">Skoglund, P., Malmström, H., Raghavan, M., Storå, J., Hall, P., Willerslev, E., Gilbert, M.T.P., Götherström, A. and Jakobsson, M. 2012. Origins and genetic legacy of Neolithic farmers and hunter-gatherers in Europe. <span class="italic">Science</span> 336(6080), 466–9.</p>
<p class="bib">Skoglund, P. and Mathieson, I. 2018. Ancient genomics of modern humans: the first decade. <span class="italic">Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics</span> 19, 381–404.</p>
<p class="bib">Speidel, L., Cassidy, L., Davies, R.W., Hellenthal, G., Skoglund, P. and Myers, S.R. 2019. Inferring population histories for ancient genomes using genome-wide genealogies. <span class="italic">Molecular Biology and Evolution</span> 38(9), 3497–511.</p>
<p class="bib">Thomas, J. 2022. Neolithization and population replacement in Britain: an alternative view. <span class="italic">Cambridge Archaeological Journal</span> 32(3), 507–25.</p>
<p class="bib">Timpson, A., Colledge, S., Crema, E., Edinborough, K., Kerig, T., Manning, K., Thomas, M.G. and Shennan, S. 2014. Reconstructing regional population fluctuations in the European Neolithic using radiocarbon dates: a new case-study using an improved method. <span class="italic">Journal of Archaeological Science</span> 52, 549–57.</p>
<p class="bib">Villalba-Mouco, V., van de Loosdrecht, M.S., Posth, C., Mora, R., Martínez-Moreno, J., Rojo-Guerra, M. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019. Survival of Late Pleistocene hunter-gatherer ancestry in the Iberian peninsula. <span class="italic">Current Biology: CB</span> 29(7), 1169–1177.e7.</p>
<p class="bib">Woodbridge, J., Fyfe, R.M., Roberts, N., Downey, S., Edinborough, K. and Shennan, S. 2014. The impact of the neolithic agricultural transition in Britain: a comparison of pollen-based land-cover and archaeological 14C date-inferred population change. <span class="italic">Journal of Archaeological Science</span> 51, 216–24.</p>
<p class="bib">Yang, M.A. and Fu, Q. 2018. Insights into modern human prehistory using ancient genomes. <span class="italic">Trends in Genetics: TIG</span> 34(3), 184–96.</p>
</div>



  </div>

  
  <div class="calibreToc">
    <h2><a href="../../0uxpbel6.html">Table of contents
</a></h2>
    <div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="00_Cover.xhtml">Front Cover</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="00a_Half.xhtml#Half">Half-Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="01_Title.xhtml">Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="02_Copyright.xhtml">Copyright Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="05_Contents.xhtml">Contents</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="03_Foreword.xhtml">Foreword</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="06_Contributors.xhtml">List of contributors</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="07_Chapter01.xhtml#ch1">1. Introduction: questions of descent, relationships and identity</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="08_Chapter02.xhtml#ch2">2. Living with archaeogenetics: three decades on</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="09_Chapter03.xhtml#ch3">3. Five challenges for an integrated archaeogenetic paradigm</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="10_Chapter04.xhtml#ch4">4. Ancient genomics methodology and genetic insularity in Neolithic Europe</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="11_Chapter05.xhtml#ch5">5. Reconstructing the genealogical relationships of hunter-gatherers and farmers</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="12_Chapter06.xhtml#ch6">6. Ancient DNA of Near Eastern Neolithic populations: the knowns and the unknowns</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="13_Chapter07.xhtml#ch7">7. Farmer-forager interactions in the Iron Gates: new insights and new dilemmas</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="14_Chapter08.xhtml#ch8">8. A glance at early Neolithic south-east and central Europe – as reflected by archaeological and archaeogenetic data</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="15_Chapter09.xhtml#ch9">9. Ancestry and identity in the Balkans and the Carpathian basin between the 5th and 3rd millennia cal BC</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="16_Chapter10.xhtml#ch10">10. The genetics of the inhabitants of Neolithic Britain: a review</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="17_Chapter11.xhtml#ch11">11. Islands apart? Genomic perspectives on the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition in Ireland</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="18_Chapter12.xhtml#ch12">12. Ancient DNA and modelling the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition in Britain and Ireland</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="19_Chapter13.xhtml#ch13">13. Looking back, looking forward – humanity beyond biology</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</div>


  </div>
  

  <div class="calibreEbNav">
    
      <a href="15_Chapter09.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
    

    <a href="../../0uxpbel6.html" class="calibreAHome">start
</a>

    
      <a href="17_Chapter11.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
    
  </div>

</div>

</body>
</html>
