<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>

    <title>Ancient DNA and the European Neolithic</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:7a42176f-8084-4cc5-b941-35f2c3610079" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>

  


<link href="../calibreHtmlOutBasicCss.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

</head>
<body>

<div class="calibreMeta">
  <div class="calibreMetaTitle">
  
  
    
    <h1>
      <a href="../../0uxpbel6.html">Ancient DNA and the European Neolithic
</a>
    </h1>
    
    
  
  </div>
  <div class="calibreMetaAuthor">
    Alasdair Whittle;Joshua Pollard;Susan Greaney;

  </div>
</div>

<div class="calibreMain">

  <div class="calibreEbookContent">
    
      <div class="calibreEbNavTop">
        
          <a href="17_Chapter11.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
        

        
          <a href="19_Chapter13.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
        
      </div>
    

    
<div id="Chapter12" class="calibre2">
<p class="chapnum" id="ch12"><a id="page_169"></a><span class="italic">Chapter 12</span></p>
<p class="linec"/>
<p class="chaptitle">Ancient DNA and modelling the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition in Britain and Ireland</p>
<p class="chapaut" id="ch12-1"><span class="italic1">Alison Sheridan and Alasdair Whittle</span></p>
<p class="noindenth"><span class="italic">We examine the impact of the recently-obtained ancient DNA evidence for Mesolithic and Neolithic individuals in Britain and Ireland, and on the Continent, on our own (and others’) divergent models of the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition in this archipelago, and draw attention to the outstanding issues which further aDNA analysis may help to resolve.</span></p>
<p class="noindentt">As many readers will know, we have proposed differing models for the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition in Britain and Ireland and have debated the matter for well over a decade. In a volume devoted to seeking dialogue across and between different disciplines and different approaches, we put our heads together and seek to explore what impact the recently obtained aDNA data for Mesolithic and Neolithic individuals in Britain and Ireland have on our (and others’) models. What new issues do the aDNA data and their interpretation throw up? And what questions still need to be addressed through further aDNA work?</p>
<p class="indent">In its subject matter, our contribution overlaps with those by Cassidy and by Brace and Booth (this volume); our intention is to complement, rather than repeat, what is presented there. For this reason, we shall not be discussing the latest model proposed by Julian Thomas (2022), as its discussion of genetic data is critiqued in detail by Brace and Booth.</p>
<p class="h">APPROACHES TO THE MESOLITHIC–NEOLITHIC TRANSITION IN BRITAIN AND IRELAND</p>
<p class="noindent">Past opinions on the nature of the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition in these islands are well known. Suffice it to recap that the dominant older model for the transition was of colonisation from continental Europe (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Clark 1966), the main puzzle being the task of deciphering the sources and origin areas for incoming population (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Case 1969). Beginning in the processual era of the 1970s and furthered in the post-processual phase of archaeological interpretation from the 1980s onwards, there was in some – but by no means all – quarters a reaction in favour of significant indigenous contribution to (or responsibility for) the processes at work, a position championed by Julian Thomas (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> 2013; 2022). There was also resistance to that indigenist turn (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Rowley-Conwy 2011), and a renewed interest in colonisation models (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Sheridan 2010; Whittle <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2011), albeit not <a id="page_170"></a>in a revisionist, culture-historical way as has been claimed (Thomas 2013, 157–84; for a response, see Sheridan 2015). The vigorous debate about who were the prime movers in the establishment of a farming way of life continues (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Lawrence <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022).</p>
<p class="indent">As for our own models, one of us has consistently advocated colonisation as the prime mover, with several strands of Neolithisation being identified, from different parts of France to different parts of Britain and Ireland, between <span class="italic">c</span>. 4300 cal BC and <span class="italic">c</span>. 3800 cal BC, undertaken for different reasons relating to developments on the near Continent and receiving varied responses from indigenous groups, who were far from passive (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Sheridan 2003; 2007; 2010; 2016; Sheridan and Schulting 2020). The earliest proposed strand, around 4300 cal BC, seen in the presence of domesticated cattle bone in a local hunter-gatherer context at Ferriter’s Cove, south-west Ireland, is regarded as a ‘false start’, dying out due to failure to establish a critical mass of farmers and their resources, and to indigenous residents hunting their cattle. A second, Breton, strand, probably <span class="italic">c</span>. 4000–3900 cal BC, saw small groups of immigrant farmers sailing up the Atlantic façade from the Morbihan region and settling at various points along the west coast of Britain and around the coast of the northern half of Ireland. Those in north-west and south-west Wales failed to flourish, unlike their counterparts in Scotland and Ireland. A third and arguably more populous strand – the ‘Carinated Bowl Neolithic’ – arrived at various points along the east and south-east coast of Britain from Nord-Pas de Calais from around the 42nd and 41st centuries cal BC, as one of a series of regional groups using Chasséo-Michelsberg pottery. A fourth strand, ‘Trans-Manche Ouest’, arrived in south-west England from Normandy around 3800 cal BC. Additional immigration from other points along the Channel may also have occurred.</p>
<p class="indent">Whittle has travelled on a more zigzag course, initially arguing for colonisation (Whittle 1977; 1985), then experimenting with the notion of significant indigenous contributions (Whittle 1996) and returning again, armed not least with significantly more robust chronology from the <span class="italic">Gathering Time</span> project, to colonisation being the leading force in a time-transgressive process across Britain and Ireland, starting probably in the south-east of England in the 41st century cal BC (Whittle <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2011, figs 14.177 and 15.8). He now cautiously proposes a provisional three-stage model for the Neolithisation of Britain and Ireland, subject to anticipated refinements in formally modelled radiocarbon chronology to be achieved through an ongoing revision of <span class="italic">Gathering Time</span> for England and Wales, undertaken with Alex Bayliss and Frances Healy. (Other upgrades, <span class="italic">e.g.</span> by Griffiths (2021; 2022) and Whittle <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2022), have already provided revised date estimates, for the start of Neolithic activity in north-west England and southern Wales, and for the spread and detailed development of causewayed enclosures respectively.) This latest model envisages a first phase featuring increasing, two-way contact (<span class="italic">cf.</span> Case 1969; Anthony 1990) between the Continent and Britain and Ireland, during the second half of the 5th millennium cal BC, with the various suggested episodes including that at Ferriter’s Cove and others at St Martin’s Quay, Scilly (Garrow <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2017) and Bexhill, East Sussex (Lawrence <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022). A second phase, from the 41st to the 39th centuries cal BC, constitutes the major period of population movement from the Continent, arriving in south-east England in the 41st century cal BC and progressively expanding outwards from there, arriving in western England and Wales by the 40th and 39th centuries cal BC. The principal ceramic association is with Carinated Bowl pottery. The evidence from Ireland, including the early dates for the enclosure and associated material at Magheraboy, Co. Sligo (discussed extensively in <a id="page_171"></a>Whittle <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2011), still has to be taken into account in this model. Whittle’s third phase sees both consolidation and growth of settlement, and a continuation of individual and group migrations, including Sheridan’s ‘Trans-Manche-Ouest’ strand. The ‘Pornic-Notgrove’ transepted-chamber monuments, for example, found respectively in southern Brittany and around the mouth of the Loire, and in southern Britain, and suspiciously similar to each other (Britnell and Whittle 2022), might signify close kinship or continuing connections (<span class="italic">cf.</span> Fowler <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022).</p>
<p class="indent">The main areas of disagreement between our models, and between these and other models, have tended to concern the degree (or indeed existence) of any two-way contact with the Continent during the 5th millennium cal BC; the agency of indigenous Mesolithic communities in the arrival and spread of farming as a way of life; the geographical patterning in the appearance and spread of farming; and the existence of the Breton, Atlantic façade strand of Neolithisation (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Whittle <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2011, chapter 15; Sheridan 2012).</p>
<p class="indent">Our, and others’, models have been evolving as the evidential base has grown and been reassessed. Many new radiocarbon dates have appeared over the last decade; isotopic data suggest some long-distance movements of individuals (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> at Penywyrlod, Powys, and Whitwell, Derbyshire: Neil <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2017; 2020); and Rowley-Conwy <span class="italic">et al</span>.’s critical review of the evidence relating to the earliest farming in Britain (2020) has shown it to be intensive, complex and skilfully undertaken, reflecting the millennium or so of expertise that its practitioners had built up on the Continent. Moreover, as regards material culture, Hélène Pioffet’s technical investigation of Carinated Bowl pottery with regard to its continental <span class="italic">comparanda</span> (Pioffet 2014) has demonstrated a continuity in tradition, suggesting immigrant potters; and <span class="italic">Projet JADE</span> has highlighted continental practices in the treatment and deposition of the axeheads made from jadeitite and other Alpine rock that the immigrant farmers brought with them (Sheridan and Pailler 2012). Meanwhile, various claims for post-Channel-formation contact between Mesolithic communities in Britain and Ireland and their contemporaries on the Continent have been made, including that regarding distinctive ‘Bexhill point’ microliths from East Sussex, as mentioned above (Lawrence <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022). The claimed evidence, from submerged sedimentary aDNA from Bouldnor Cliff, for the presence of wheat <span class="italic">c</span>. 6000 cal BC (Smith <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2015) has been vigorously – and in our view, justifiably – challenged (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Calloway 2015). (See also Sheridan 2018 on claims for continental-style microliths on Scilly, and see below regarding Bexhill.) Arguably the most significant development, however, is the advent of aDNA data from Mesolithic and Neolithic humans in Britain and Ireland, and of relevant individuals on the Continent, particularly France. It is to this, and its impact on the debate, that we now turn.</p>
<p class="h">THE aDNA RESULTS AND THEIR IMPACT ON EXISTING MODELS</p>
<p class="noindent">As set out by Whittle and Pollard (this volume), aDNA studies across Europe have shown the dominant process in the appearance and spread of farming to be the arrival, and subsequent expansion, of new people with Aegean/Near Eastern genetic ancestry. Two routes of population dispersal have been suggested, one westwards though the Mediterranean and the other through south-east, central and north-west Europe. Along the way and over time, variable degrees of genetic admixture with indigenous hunter-gatherer <a id="page_172"></a>communities were involved in what was clearly a complex process (as discussed by Richards, this volume).</p>
<p class="indent">To date, the aDNA of some six Mesolithic and 111 Neolithic individuals in Britain, plus two Mesolithic and 55 Neolithic individuals in Ireland, has been analysed, with further results from others in the pipeline (Cassidy <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2016; 2020; Olalde <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2018; Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019; Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2019; Dulias <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022; Fowler <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022; Patterson <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022; note that many of the results are to be found in the Supplementary information sections).</p>
<p class="indent">As the chapters in this volume by Selina Brace and Tom Booth and by Lara Cassidy make clear, the results obtained so far, along with those for contemporary and earlier individuals on the Continent (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Brunel <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020; Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020; <span class="italic">cf.</span> Beau <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2017), demonstrate unequivocally the arrival of immigrants from the Continent to our archipelago in the centuries around 4000 cal BC, thereby supporting Sheridan’s and Whittle’s (and others’) overall conclusion, based on non-aDNA data, that the farming way of life was indeed introduced by continental farmers. Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2019, 768) report that individuals showing Aegean Neolithic Farmers (ANF) ancestry had arrived in Britain from the Continent by <span class="italic">3975–3722 cal BC</span>. Additional confirmation for this continental ancestry comes from Rohrlach <span class="italic">et al</span>.’s recent study (2021) of the rare clade H2m – one associated with the Mediterranean route of the Neolithic spread through Europe, and found in individuals in the Paris basin and Normandy. This clade is represented in two individuals from Middle Neolithic Linkardstown-type cists at Jerpoint West and Baunogenasraid in south-east Ireland (Rohrlach <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2021, fig. 3; note that in their Supplementary information, the placename Jerpoint is wrongly listed as Killuragh). Moreover, the sharing of the commonest lineages between Neolithic individuals in Britain and Ireland indicates a common ancestral genetic pool for those lineages (Richards, this volume); as Cassidy (this volume) points out, previous claims for differing origins for Irish and British Neolithic individuals (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020, 9) have not taken into account the differing methods of processing aDNA data that have been used by the laboratories in question. (Most of the British data are reported on the basis of using the cheaper, targeted method of SNP capture, whereas in Ireland, the results of total genome analysis are reported.) The question of the degree of genetic similarity between the Neolithic populations of Ireland and Britain is also discussed by Brace and Booth (this volume) and by Ariano <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2022).</p>
<p class="indent">Both the headline results, and those from finer-grained interrogation of the aDNA data, are revelatory. In Ireland, for example, these incomers (whether they came directly from the Continent or via Britain, or both) were entering a landscape whose genetic pool was restricted, reflecting ‘a prolonged period of island isolation’ of several millennia (Cassidy <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020, 3–4) – an isolation that is also reflected in the distinctly insular Irish Later Mesolithic material culture (Woodman 2015; <span class="italic">cf.</span> Warren 2021), and which casts doubt on claims for two-way contacts with the Continent during the 5th millennium cal BC (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Thomas 2013, but see the Whittle model above for the later 5th millennium). Some idea of the scale of immigration is offered by the results from the early Neolithic portal tomb at Poulnabrone and nearby court tomb at Parknabinnia, both Co. Clare, where the lack of close kin among either tomb’s occupants suggests a sizeable community within the monuments’ ‘catchment’ areas, with no inbreeding (Cassidy <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020, 1, 3). Other indications that we are dealing with a sizeable influx of people overall, in both Ireland and Britain, include the absence of a ‘bottleneck’ effect (which would be caused if a small number of incoming <a id="page_173"></a>families had had large families) and the near-disappearance and subsequent non-resurgence of the indigenous Mesolithic genetic signature following the arrival of continental farmers (Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019, 770; Cassidy <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020, supplementary data).</p>
<p class="indent">The aDNA results also arguably support Sheridan’s contention that people were arriving from more than one location on the Continent to more than one location in Britain (and Ireland). The claimed south-west to north-east cline in Britain in the amount of Western Hunter-Gatherer (WHG) admixture in Neolithic individuals – resulting from previous intermixing between farmers and hunter-gatherers on the Continent – reported by Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2019) reflects ‘multiple source populations with variable proportions of WHG admixture having entered different parts of Britain’ (Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019, 769). Similar conclusions about multiple locations of departure and arrival were reached by Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>. in their study of French and German Neolithic individuals, and their comparison with British and Irish individuals (Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020, 9). This topic is discussed further by Brace and Booth (this volume).</p>
<p class="indent">The finding that Neolithic individuals in eastern Britain (including in areas characterised by ‘Carinated Bowl Neolithic’ monuments and material culture) tend to have a higher amount of continental-acquired WHG admixture than those in the west might also offer a clue to the directionality of some of this movement. Beau <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2017) have noted, in their study of early Michelsberg individuals, that a high WHG admixture also characterises Neolithic people in the Paris basin, an area from which groups are known to have emigrated in several directions, from <span class="italic">c</span>. 4300 cal BC onwards, due to perceived overpopulation. Sheridan has argued (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> 2010; 2016; 2021) that the ‘Carinated Bowl Neolithic’ farmers, with their Chasséo-Michelsberg style pottery, came from one of a series of regional groupings of such ‘Paris basin emigrés’ in northern France and Belgium, more specifically one in Nord-Pas de Calais. Possible confirmation for such a view comes from Lara Cassidy’s observation (this volume) that one of the individuals whose remains were found in a causewayed enclosure at Escalles, Nord-Pas de Calais (Brunel <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020, SI.1 and 3.3.4, table S1.1: Es97-1) – the closest region of France to Britain – bears a particularly close genetic similarity to British and Irish Neolithic individuals.</p>
<p class="indent">As for the other movements proposed by Sheridan, support for the ‘Trans-Manche Ouest’ strand is offered by Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>.’s study, which acknowledges the possibility that some farmers emigrated from Normandy (Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020, 7, 9).</p>
<p class="indent">As for Sheridan’s Breton, Atlantic façade strand, while no aDNA data have yet been obtained for any Neolithic individuals in Brittany (due to the generally poor preservation of bone in the acidic environment there), much has been made in some quarters (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019) of the apparent genetic similarity, first reported upon by Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2019, 766), between some British and Irish individuals and Iberian Neolithic farmers. Some have inferred from this that Britain and Ireland were colonised by Iberian Neolithic farmers. The problems with such an inference are dealt with in the next section of this chapter.</p>
<p class="indent">Regarding the relationship between the incoming farmers and the indigenous hunter-gatherer groups, while the ‘headline’ aDNA result is one of a near-total population replacement, with no subsequent resurgence in WHG signatures, in contrast to the Continent (Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019), this does not imply a wipeout – and indeed, what geneticists mean by the term ‘population replacement’ is very different from non-geneticists’ understanding of that term (Booth 2019; Booth <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2021; Brace and Booth, this volume). <a id="page_174"></a>That the incomers and indigenes were indeed aware of each other is clear from the small yet growing number of cases demonstrating interbreeding: eight examples from western Scotland (Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019; Brace and Booth, this volume) and one from Ireland (Cassidy <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020, 4). (Some of these incomers will have looked different from the indigenous Mesolithic inhabitants of Britain and Ireland, being in the main slightly lighterskinned – but still darker-skinned than typical present-day white inhabitants of north-west Europe – and more likely to have brown rather than light-coloured eyes: Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019, 768–9; Cassidy <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020, table S12.) As Tom Booth has pointed out (2019), the indigenous genetic signatures could easily have become drowned out if the population size and density of Mesolithic Britain and Ireland were low, yet the number of incoming farmers was high (and rapidly growing). The topics of genetic admixture between indigenes and incomers in Britain, and of the negligible Mesolithic genetic legacy, are discussed further by Brace and Booth (this volume).</p>
<p class="indent">Finer-grained examination of the aDNA data has also thrown up some fascinating observations. These include the earliest definitive evidence for an infant with Down’s syndrome, at Poulnabrone in south-west Ireland (Cassidy <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020, 4); centuries-long familial links between the people buried in passage tombs in different parts of Ireland, and a case of incest attested at the massive passage tomb at Newgrange (Cassidy <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020); a relatively high incidence of intra-community breeding among the late 4th/early 3rd millennium cal BC occupants of Isbister chamber tomb in Orkney (Ariano and Bradley, this volume); and detailed ‘kith and kin’ relationships among the people buried in the Severn-Cotswold tomb at Hazleton North (Fowler 2022; Fowler <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022, and note that the family tree diagram presented in Extended Data fig. 4 is considered to be a better fit with the data than that presented in fig. 1 of the main article). No doubt other fascinating insights will emerge from further interrogation of the existing aDNA data, and from the acquisition of new aDNA data.</p>
<p class="h">THE ‘IBERIAN’ GENETIC SIGNATURE AMONG BRITISH AND IRISH NEOLITHIC INDIVIDUALS: A RED HERRING</p>
<p class="noindent">The aforementioned genetic similarity, first noted by Cassidy <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2016) and also observed by Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2019), between 4th millennium cal BC British and Irish individuals and Iberian Neolithic farmers, has given rise to an argument that the latter were somehow directly involved in the appearance of farming in our archipelago (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019, 9473). Such a view, however, finds no support whatsoever in the monuments or material culture of Britain and Ireland, and in our view misunderstands both the archaeological and the genetic information; apparent genetic affinity does not automatically signify direct connection. (The same can be said of Sánchez-Quinto <span class="italic">et al</span>.’s claims (2019, 9470, 9473) for migration of Neolithic monument builders from Britain to Scandinavia; there is no convincing archaeological evidence for interaction between these areas during the Neolithic (<span class="italic">contra</span> Cummings <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022, 5), and any genetic affinity is far more likely to be due to shared ancestry in northern France than to direct contact.)</p>
<p class="indent">The ‘Iberian’ – or, more generally, Mediterranean – genetic ‘signature’ has been discussed by other geneticists, including Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2020), who have observed that it is by no means <a id="page_175"></a>restricted to Iberian Neolithic farmers. Associated with the Mediterranean route of the spread of farmers and farming across Europe, the haplotypes in question – which include the aforementioned H2m clade as studied by Rohrlach <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2021) – are associated with many French Neolithic individuals as well as Iberians, and their incidence in the northern half of France can arguably be accounted for by several possible factors: the spread, along the Atlantic coast, of elements of ‘Mediterranean’ Neolithic practices and material culture during the 6th millennium; subsequent south–north movements or interactions within France during the 5th millennium; and interactions between Brittany and Iberia at various points during the 5th millennium.</p>
<p class="indent">Regarding the first point, Grégor Marchand has described the 6th millennium northerly spread of practices and material culture relating to the Mediterranean ‘strand’ of Neolithisation up the Atlantic coast of France, and argued for a complex set of interactions between farmers and hunter-gatherer groups at different places along that coast (Marchand 2007) – a picture that seems to be borne out by the aDNA evidence (Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020). Aspects of this still poorly understood Mediterranean ‘strand’ are detectable in Brittany in the Augy-Saint-Pallaye ceramic style, which combines Epicardial features (with their Mediterranean ‘ancestry’) with those of the Villeneuve-Saint-Germain ceramic tradition whose origins lie in the Danubian strand of Neolithisation (Marchand 2007, 235–6).</p>
<p class="indent">As regards subsequent movements and/or interactions within France, the processes involved in the adoption, in northern France, of elements of Chassey-style pottery from southern France during the 43rd century cal BC (Gernigon 2016, 40) may have provided another vector for the arrival of a ‘Mediterranean’ genetic signature in northern France.</p>
<p class="indent">Finally, the interactions between Brittany and Iberia at various points during the 5th millennium – as shown, for instance, in the importation of variscite beads and fibrolite axeheads from Spain, and the emulation of Morbihannais-style Alpine axeheads in Iberia (Cassen <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020) – could well have enhanced a pre-existing ‘Iberian/Mediterranean’ genetic signature in the Breton gene pool.</p>
<p class="indent">Therefore, Iberia is by no means the only area from which a ‘Mediterranean’ genetic signature could have arrived in Britain and Ireland. (See also Cassidy, and Brace and Booth, this volume.) Indeed, in their evaluation of the available aDNA data, Rivollat <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2020, 7) conclude that ‘on the basis of the results from our French Neolithic sites, we suggest that English, Welsh, and Scottish groups are connected to the Mediterranean Neolithic sphere not only via the Atlantic coast but more plausibly also via Normandy…, the Paris Basin…, and southern France…’.</p>
<p class="h">OUTSTANDING ISSUES TO BE ADDRESSED THROUGH aDNA ANALYSIS</p>
<p class="noindent">The aDNA data have clearly made a significant impact on the debate about the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition in Britain and Ireland. Several key issues remain to be addressed, however.</p>
<p class="indent">There are significant geographical gaps in the aDNA coverage for western and northwest France (and indeed within Britain), and the absence of any such data for Neolithic Brittany makes it impossible to substantiate or disprove the hypothesised Breton, Atlantic façade ‘strand’ genetically. It remains to be seen whether the very few extant <a id="page_176"></a>Neolithic human bones from Brittany have the potential to yield aDNA, or whether any suitable candidates come to light from future excavations. In addition to this geographical patchiness, the current inconsistency in the way different laboratories process aDNA results – with some examining the total genome data and others targeting particular parts – can affect the comparability of the results, as Cassidy has pointed out (this volume); ideally, wherever possible, non-targeted comparison should be undertaken. Moreover, obtaining larger sample sizes and more haplotype data will be required in order to achieve a clearer genetic picture of different migration streams from geographically and culturally distinct, yet genetically similar, populations in France.</p>
<p class="indent">Questions about the absolute number and density of Mesolithic individuals in Britain and Ireland, and of incoming Neolithic farmers from the Continent, remain frustratingly hard to resolve, as pointed out by Cassidy and by Brace and Booth (this volume), and further refinement of methods is necessary to arrive at plausible estimates. The relative size of the various hypothesised ‘strands’ needs to be clarified, to check whether it accords with that proposed by Sheridan or with that advocated by Whittle in his latest model; while it appears that the arrival of the ‘Carinated Bowl Neolithic’ involved a substantial influx of incomers, it is less clear whether the other strands involved many fewer migrants. The timing and duration of the population movements also need to be clarified; are we dealing with short-term ‘pulses’ of immigration, or with a steady (or irregular) flow over several generations, or both?</p>
<p class="indent">Other outstanding questions include that of whether any genetic intermixing between individuals in Britain and those on the Continent occurred between the time when the Channel formed (<span class="italic">c</span>. 6000 cal BC) and the time when Neolithic ‘things and practices’ were appearing, between the 42nd or 41st and 39th centuries cal BC. Only one of the six analysed British Mesolithic individuals – a female from Cnoc Coig, Oronsay, Scotland – falls within this time period (Brace <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019) and the fact that her genome is typical of Western Hunter-Gatherers, rather than of contemporary individuals on the Continent, indicates no continental intermixing in this case. More 5th-millennium individuals in Britain – especially from areas closest to the Continent – need to be analysed to determine whether the Cnoc Coig woman is typical or atypical. Unfortunately, precious few individuals have been dated to this period, and none of these is from southern England (Meiklejohn <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2011), and so we must await new discoveries before this genetic question can be addressed.</p>
<p class="h">IN CONCLUSION: HAVE THE aDNA RESULTS ENGENDERED CONSENSUS IN MODELLING THE MESOLITHIC–NEOLITHIC TRANSITION IN BRITAIN AND IRELAND?</p>
<p class="noindent">To judge from the range of views expressed in recent archaeological publications that mention the aDNA data (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> Cummings <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022; Lawrence <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022; Thomas 2022), the short answer to this question is ‘Not really’, and this is also the case regarding the current models favoured by this chapter’s two authors. Differences of opinion remain, for instance, about whether any hunter-gatherers in Britain and Ireland ventured over the sea to the Continent. In the opinion of at least one of us, the same objections that have been <a id="page_177"></a>expressed about past claims for such movement (Sheridan 2015; 2018) can be levelled at the new claims, made by Lawrence <span class="italic">et al</span>. (2022) in their report on a large Mesolithic assemblage from Bexhill; the widely spaced French and Iberian <span class="italic">comparanda</span> for the distinctive ‘Bexhill point’ microliths are not, as the authors admit, precise matches. Moreover, their argument for the association (and, by implication, contemporaneity) between cereal grains and lithics dating to 4400–4300 cal BC (Lawrence <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022, 566) remains to be tested by dates on the cereal grains, and the ‘association’ between some Bexhill points and pottery (of as-yet-unidentified type) is tenuous, given that the contexts are not firmly sealed. Finally, their claim that 5th-millennium T-shaped antler axeheads in Scotland indicate links with Ertebølle and/or Swifterbant groups on the Continent is not substantiated by any other evidence suggesting such continental links (<span class="italic">e.g.</span> pottery), and the possibility of independent invention of this artefact type in different places is not considered. (Despite these criticisms, the Bexhill publication is to be praised for highlighting variability in Later Mesolithic material culture in England.)</p>
<p class="indent">It is likely that the long-running debate on the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition will continue to be characterised by differing interpretations of the same few evidential details – among both archaeologists and geneticists, in their own arenas of research. The need for rigour in evaluating and interpreting evidence, and for being mutually well informed when archaeologists and geneticists debate, is self-evident. Moreover, all models should incorporate the best available formally modelled chronology (or chronologies). Some issues, such as the existence or otherwise of the Breton, Atlantic façade ‘strand’, can only be resolved through targeted new excavation. Nevertheless, the advent of aDNA results has afforded us a step-change in the debate, and we look forward to the generation of many more aDNA data in the future, with archaeologists and geneticists engaging in informed, two-way discussion.</p>
<p class="h">ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS</p>
<p class="noindent">The following are thanked for providing information and advice: Tom Booth, Selina Brace, Lara Cassidy, Susan Greaney and Maïté Rivollat.</p>
<p class="h">REFERENCES</p>
<p class="bib">Anthony, D.W. 1990. Migration in archaeology: the baby and the bathwater. <span class="italic">American Anthropologist</span> 92, 895–914.</p>
<p class="bib">Ariano, B., Mattiangeli, V., Breslin, E.M., Parkinson, E.W., McLaughlin, T.R., Thompson, J.E. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022. Ancient Maltese genomes and the genetic geography of Neolithic Europe. <span class="italic">Current Biology: CB</span>, <span class="shyphen"><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2022.04.069">http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2022.04.069</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Bayliss, A., Marshall, P., Richards, C. and Whittle, A. 2017. Islands of history: the Late Neolithic timescape of Orkney. <span class="italic">Antiquity</span> 91, 1171–88.</p>
<p class="bib">Beau, A., Rivollat, M., Réveillas, H., Pemonge, M.-H., Mendisco, F., Thomas, Y. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2017. Multi-scale ancient DNA analyses confirm the western origin of Michelsberg farmers and document probable practices of human sacrifice. <span class="italic">PLoS One</span> 12(7): e0179742. <span class="shyphen"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0179742">https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0179742</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib"><a id="page_178"></a>Booth, T. 2019. A stranger in a strange land: a perspective on archaeological responses to the palaeogenetic revolution from an archaeologist working amongst palaeogeneticists. <span class="italic">World Archaeology</span> 51, 586–601.</p>
<p class="bib">Booth, T., Brück, J., Brace, S, and Barnes, I. 2021. Tales from the Supplementary Information: ancestry change in Chalcolithic–Early Bronze Age Britain was gradual with varied kinship organization. <span class="italic">Cambridge Archaeological Journal</span>, doi:10.1017/S0959774321000019.</p>
<p class="bib">Brace, S., Diekmann, Y., Booth, T.J., van Dorp, L., Faltyskova, Z., Rohland, N. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019. Ancient genomes indicate population replacement in Early Neolithic Britain. <span class="italic">Nature Ecology and Evolution</span> 3, 765–71.</p>
<p class="bib">Britnell, W. and Whittle, A. (eds) 2022. <span class="italic">The first stones: Penywyrlod, Gwernvale and the Black Mountains Neolithic long cairns of south-east Wales</span>. Oxford: Oxbow Books.</p>
<p class="bib">Brunel, S., Bennett, A., Cardin, L., Garraud, D., Barrand Emam, H., Beylier, A. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020. Ancient genomes from present-day France unveil 7,000 years of its demographic history. <span class="italic">Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America</span> 117(23), 12791–8.</p>
<p class="bib">Calloway, E. 2015. Ancient DNA dispute raises questions about wheat trade in prehistoric Britain. <span class="italic">Nature</span> (2015). <span class="shyphen"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/nature.2015.18702">https://doi.org/10.1038/nature.2015.18702</a></span></p>
<p class="bib">Case, H. 1969. Neolithic explanations. <span class="italic">Antiquity</span> 43, 176–86.</p>
<p class="bib">Cassen, S., Pétrequin, P., Querré, G., Grimaud, V. and Rodríguez-Rellan, C. 2020. Spaces and signs for the transfer of jade and callaïs in the Neolithic of Western Europe. In C. Rodríguez-Rellan, B.A. Nelson and R. Fábregas Valcarce (eds), <span class="italic">A taste for green: a global perspective on ancient jade, turquoise and variscite exchange</span>, 121–39. Oxford: Oxbow Books.</p>
<p class="bib">Cassidy, L.M., Martiniano, R., Murphy, E.M., Teasdale, M.D., Mallory, J., Hartwell, B. and Bradley, D.G. 2016. Neolithic and Bronze Age migration to Ireland and establishment of the insular Atlantic genome. <span class="italic">Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America</span> 113, 368–73.</p>
<p class="bib">Cassidy, L.M., Ó Maoldúin, R., Kador, T., Lynch, A., Jones, C., Woodman, P.C. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020. A dynastic elite in monumental Neolithic society. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 582, 384–8.</p>
<p class="bib">Clark, G. 1966. The invasion hypothesis in British archaeology. <span class="italic">Antiquity</span> 40, 172–89.</p>
<p class="bib">Cummings, V., Hofmann, D., Bjørnevad-Ahlqvist, M. and Iversen, R. 2022. Muddying the waters: reconsidering migration in the Neolithic of Britain, Ireland and Denmark. <span class="italic">Danish Journal of Archaeology</span> 11, 1–25.</p>
<p class="bib">Dulias, K., Foody, M.G.B., Justeau, P., Silva, M., Martiniano, R., Oteo-Garcia, G. <span class="italic">et al.</span> 2022. Ancient DNA at the edge of the world: continental immigration and the persistence of Neolithic male lineages in Bronze Age Orkney. <span class="italic">Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America</span> 119(8). <span class="shyphen"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2108001119">https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2108001119</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Fowler, C. 2022. Social arrangements. Kinship, descent and affinity in the mortuary architecture of Early Neolithic Britain and Ireland. <span class="italic">Archaeological Dialogues</span> (2022), 1–22, doi:10.1017/ S1380203821000210.</p>
<p class="bib">Fowler, C., Olalde, I., Cummings, V., Armit, I., Büster, L., Cuthbert, G.S., Rohland, H., Cheronet, O., Pinhasi, R. and Reich, D. 2022. A high-resolution picture of kinship practices in an Early Neolithic tomb. <span class="italic">Nature,</span> <span class="shyphen"><a href="http://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04241-4">doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04241-4</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Garrow, D., Griffiths, S., Anderson-Whymark, H. and Sturt, F. 2017. Stepping stones to the Neolithic? Radiocarbon dating the early Neolithic on islands within the ‘western seaways’ of Britain. <span class="italic">Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society</span> 83, 97–135.</p>
<p class="bib">Gernigon, K. 2016. Sphère d’interactions, complexe culturel: clefs de lecture de la variabilité géographique des expressions stylistiques du Chasséen. In T. Perrin, P. Chambon, J.F. Gibaja and G. Goude (eds), <span class="italic">Le Chasséen, des Chasséens… Retour sur une culture nationale et ses parallèles, Sepulcres de fossa, Cortaillod, Lagozza. Actes du colloque international tenu à Paris (France) du 18 au 20 novembre 2014</span>, 29–45. Toulouse: Archives d’Écologie Préhistorique</p>
<p class="bib"><a id="page_179"></a>Griffiths, S. 2018. A cereal problem? What the current chronology of early cereal domesticates might tell us about changes in late fifth and early fourth millennium cal BC Ireland and Britain. <span class="italic">Environmental Archaeology</span>, doi: 10.1080/14614103.2018.1529945.</p>
<p class="bib">Griffiths, S. 2021. The last hunters of a wise race. In G. Hey and P. Frodsham (eds), <span class="italic">New light on the Neolithic of northern England</span>, 31–51. Oxford: Oxbow Books.</p>
<p class="bib">Griffiths, S. 2022. A chronology of the Black Mountains tombs and their place in the early Neolithic of south Wales and the Marches. In W. Britnell and A. Whittle (eds), <span class="italic">The first stones: Penywyrlod, Gwernvale and the Black Mountains Neolithic long cairns of south-east Wales</span>, 79–114. Oxford: Oxbow Books.</p>
<p class="bib">Lawrence, T., Donnelly, M., Kennard, L., Souday, C. and Grant, R. 2022. Britain in or out of Europe during the late Mesolithic? A new perspective of the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition. <span class="italic">Open Archaeology</span> 8(1), 2022, 550–77. <span class="shyphen"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1515/opar-2022-0249">https://doi.org/10.1515/opar-2022-0249</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Marchand, G. 2007. Neolithic fragrances: Mesolithic-Neolithic interactions in western France. In A. Whittle and V. Cummings (eds), <span class="italic">Going over: the Mesolithic-Neolithic transition in north-west Europe</span>, 225–42. Oxford: Oxford University Press for The British Academy.</p>
<p class="bib">Meiklejohn, C., Chamberlain, A.T. and Schulting, R.J. 2011. Radiocarbon dating of Mesolithic human remains in Great Britain. <span class="italic">Mesolithic Miscellany</span> 21:2, 20–58.</p>
<p class="bib">Neil, S., Evans, J., Montgomery, J. and Scarre, C. 2020. Isotopic evidence for human movement into central England during the Early Neolithic. <span class="italic">European Journal of Archaeology</span> 2020, 1–18.</p>
<p class="bib">Neil, S., Montgomery, J., Evans, J., Cook, G.T. and Scarre, C. 2017. Land use and mobility during the Neolithic in Wales explored using isotope analysis of tooth enamel. <span class="italic">American Journal of Physical Anthropology</span> 164, 371–93.</p>
<p class="bib">Olalde, I., Brace, S., Allentoft, M.E., Armit, I., Kristiansen, K., Rohland, N. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2018. The Beaker phenomenon and the genomic transformation of northwest Europe. <span class="italic">Nature</span> February 21, 2018; doi:10.1038/nature25738.</p>
<p class="bib">Patterson, N., Isakov, M., Booth, T., Büster, L., Fischer, C.-E., Olalde, I. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2022. Large-scale migration into Britain during the Middle to Late Bronze Age. <span class="italic">Nature</span> 601, 588–94.</p>
<p class="bib">Pioffet, H. 2014. <span class="italic">Sociétés et identités du Premier Néolithique de Grande-Bretagne et d’Irlande dans leur contexte ouest européen: caractérisation et analyses comparatives des productions céramiques entre Manche, Mer d’Irlande et Mer du Nord</span>. PhD thesis, University of Durham and Rennes 1. <span class="shyphen"><a href="http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/11011/">http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/11011/</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Rivollat, M., Jeong, C., Schiffels, S., Küçükkalıpçı, İ, Pemonge, M.-H., Rohrlach, A.B. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020. Ancient genome-wide DNA from France highlights the complexity of interactions between Mesolithic hunter-gatherers and Neolithic farmers. <span class="italic">Science Advances</span> 6, eaaz5344, 29 May 2020.</p>
<p class="bib">Rohrlach, A.B., Papac, L., Childebayeva, A., Rivollat, M., Villalba-Mouco, V., Neumann, G.U. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2021. Using Y-chromosome capture enrichment to resolve haplogroup H2 shows new evidence for a two-path Neolithic expansion to Western Europe. <span class="italic">Scientific Reports</span> 11, 15005(2021). <span class="shyphen"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-94491-z">https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-94491-z</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Rowley-Conwy, P. 2011. Westward Ho! The spread of agriculture from central Europe to the Atlantic. <span class="italic">Current Anthropology</span> 52, S431–51.</p>
<p class="bib">Rowley-Conwy, P., Gron, K.J., Bishop, R.R., Dunne, J., Evershed, R.P., Longford, C. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2020. The earliest farming in Britain: towards a new synthesis. In K.J. Gron, L. Sørensen and P. Rowley-Conwy (eds), <span class="italic">Farmers at the frontier: a pan-European perspective on Neolithisation</span>, 401–24. Oxford: Oxbow Books.</p>
<p class="bib">Sánchez-Quinto, F., Malmström, H, Fraser, M., Girdland-Flink, L., Svensson, E., Simões, L.G. <span class="italic">et al</span>. 2019. Megalithic tombs in Western and Northern Neolithic Europe were linked to a kindred society. <span class="italic">Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America</span> 116(19), 9469–74.</p>
<p class="bib">Sheridan, J.A. 2003. French connections I: spreading the marmites thinly. In I. Armit, E. Murphy, E. Nelis and D. Simpson (eds), <span class="italic">Neolithic settlement in Ireland and western Britain</span>, 3–17. Oxford: Oxbow Books.</p>
<p class="bib"><a id="page_180"></a>Sheridan, J.A. 2004. Neolithic connections along and across the Irish Sea. In V. Cummings and C. Fowler (eds), <span class="italic">The Neolithic of the Irish Sea: materiality and traditions of practice</span>, 9–21. Oxford: Oxbow Books.</p>
<p class="bib">Sheridan, J.A. 2007. From Picardie to Pickering and Pencraig Hill? New information on the ‘Carinated Bowl Neolithic’ in northern Britain. In A. Whittle and V. Cummings (eds), <span class="italic">Going over: the Mesolithic-Neolithic transition in north-west Europe,</span> 441–92. Oxford: Oxford University Press for The British Academy.</p>
<p class="bib">Sheridan, J.A. 2010. The Neolithisation of Britain and Ireland: the ‘big picture’. In B. Finlayson and G.M. Warren (eds), <span class="italic">Landscapes in transition</span>, 89–105. Oxford and London: Oxbow Books and Council for British Research in the Levant.</p>
<p class="bib">Sheridan, J.A. 2011. The Early Neolithic of south-west England: new insights and new questions. In S. Pearce (ed.), <span class="italic">Recent archaeological work in South Western Britain: papers in honour of Henrietta Quinnell</span>, 21–40. Oxford: Archaeopress.</p>
<p class="bib">Sheridan, J.A. 2012. Review of A. Whittle, F. Healy and A. Bayliss, <span class="italic">Gathering Time: Dating the Early Neolithic Enclosures of Southern Britain and Ireland. Antiquity</span> 86(331), 262–4.</p>
<p class="bib">Sheridan, J.A. 2015. Review of Julian Thomas, <span class="italic">The Birth of Neolithic Britain: an interpretive account. European Journal of Archaeology</span> 18 (4), 720–7.</p>
<p class="bib">Sheridan, J.A. 2016. Scottish Neolithic pottery in 2016: the big picture and some details of the narrative. In F.J. Hunter and J.A. Sheridan (eds) <span class="italic">Ancient lives: object, people and place in early Scotland. Essays for David V Clarke on his 70th birthday</span>, 189–212. Leiden: Sidestone Press.</p>
<p class="bib">Sheridan, J. A. 2018. Review of D. Garrow &amp; F. Sturt, <span class="italic">Neolithic Stepping Stones: excavation and survey within the western seaways of Britain, 2008–2014</span>, for Prehistoric Society online reviews: <span class="shyphen"><a href="http://www.prehistoricsociety.org/files/reviews/Neolithic_Stepping_Stones_Final.pdf">http://www.prehistoricsociety.org/files/reviews/Neolithic_Stepping_Stones_Final.pdf</a></span>.</p>
<p class="bib">Sheridan, J.A. 2021. A view from north of the border. In G. Hey and P. Frodsham (eds), <span class="italic">New light on the Neolithic of northern England</span>, 177–88. Oxford: Oxbow Books.</p>
<p class="bib">Sheridan, J.A. and Pailler, Y. 2012. Les haches alpines et leurs imitations en Grande Bretagne, Irlande et dans les Iles anglo-normandes. In P. Pétrequin, S. Cassen, M. Errera, L. Klassen, A. Sheridan and A.-M. Pétrequin (eds), <span class="italic">Jade. Grandes haches alpines du Néolithique européen. Ve et IVe millénaires av. J.-C</span>., 1046–87. Besançon: Presses Universitaires de Franche-Comté; Gray: Centre de Recherche Archéologique de la Vallée de l’Ain.</p>
<p class="bib">Sheridan, J.A. and Schulting, R. 2020. Making sense of Scottish Neolithic funerary monuments: tracing trajectories and understanding their rationale. In A.B. Gebauer, L. Sørensen, A. Teather and A.C. Valera (eds), <span class="italic">Monumentalising life in the Neolithic: narratives of change and continuity</span>, 195–215. Oxford: Oxbow Books.</p>
<p class="bib">Sheridan, J.A., Schulting, R., Quinnell, H. and Taylor, R. 2008. Revisiting a small passage tomb at Broadsands, Devon. <span class="italic">Proceedings of the Devon Archaeological Society</span> 66, 1–26.</p>
<p class="bib">Smith, O., Momber, G., Bates, R., Garwood, P., Fitch, S., Pallen, M., Gaffney, V. and Allaby, R.G. 2015. Sedimentary DNA from a submerged site reveals wheat in the British Isles 8000 years ago. <span class="italic">Science</span> 347(6225), 998–1001 <span class="shyphen"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1261278">https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1261278</a></span></p>
<p class="bib">Thomas, J. 2013. <span class="italic">The birth of Neolithic Britain: an interpretive account</span>. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</p>
<p class="bib">Thomas, J. 2022. Neolithization and population replacement in Britain: an alternative view. <span class="italic">Cambridge Archaeological Journal,</span> doi:10.1017/S0959774321000639.</p>
<p class="bib">Warren, G. 2021. <span class="italic">Hunter-gatherer Ireland: making connections in an island world</span>. Oxford: Oxbow.</p>
<p class="bib">Whittle, A. 1977. <span class="italic">The earlier Neolithic of southern England and its continental background</span>. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.</p>
<p class="bib">Whittle, A. 1985. <span class="italic">Neolithic Europe: a survey</span>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</p>
<p class="bib">Whittle, A. 1996. <span class="italic">Europe in the Neolithic: the creation of new worlds</span>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</p>
<p class="bib"><a id="page_181"></a>Whittle, A. 2018. <span class="italic">The times of their lives: hunting history in the archaeology of Neolithic Europe</span>. Oxford: Oxbow Books.</p>
<p class="bib">Whittle, A., Bayliss, A. and Healy, F. 2022. A decade on: revised timings for causewayed enclosures in southern Britain. In J. Last (ed.), <span class="italic">Marking place: new perspectives on early Neolithic enclosures</span>, 203–22. Oxford: Oxbow Books.</p>
<p class="bib">Whittle, A., Healy, F. and Bayliss, A. 2011. <span class="italic">Gathering time: dating the early Neolithic enclosures of southern Britain and Ireland</span>. Oxford: Oxbow Books.</p>
<p class="bib">Woodman, P.C. 2015. <span class="italic">Ireland’s first settlers: time and the Mesolithic</span>. Oxford: Oxbow Books.<a id="page_182"></a></p>
</div>



  </div>

  
  <div class="calibreToc">
    <h2><a href="../../0uxpbel6.html">Table of contents
</a></h2>
    <div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="00_Cover.xhtml">Front Cover</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="00a_Half.xhtml#Half">Half-Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="01_Title.xhtml">Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="02_Copyright.xhtml">Copyright Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="05_Contents.xhtml">Contents</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="03_Foreword.xhtml">Foreword</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="06_Contributors.xhtml">List of contributors</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="07_Chapter01.xhtml#ch1">1. Introduction: questions of descent, relationships and identity</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="08_Chapter02.xhtml#ch2">2. Living with archaeogenetics: three decades on</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="09_Chapter03.xhtml#ch3">3. Five challenges for an integrated archaeogenetic paradigm</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="10_Chapter04.xhtml#ch4">4. Ancient genomics methodology and genetic insularity in Neolithic Europe</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="11_Chapter05.xhtml#ch5">5. Reconstructing the genealogical relationships of hunter-gatherers and farmers</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="12_Chapter06.xhtml#ch6">6. Ancient DNA of Near Eastern Neolithic populations: the knowns and the unknowns</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="13_Chapter07.xhtml#ch7">7. Farmer-forager interactions in the Iron Gates: new insights and new dilemmas</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="14_Chapter08.xhtml#ch8">8. A glance at early Neolithic south-east and central Europe – as reflected by archaeological and archaeogenetic data</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="15_Chapter09.xhtml#ch9">9. Ancestry and identity in the Balkans and the Carpathian basin between the 5th and 3rd millennia cal BC</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="16_Chapter10.xhtml#ch10">10. The genetics of the inhabitants of Neolithic Britain: a review</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="17_Chapter11.xhtml#ch11">11. Islands apart? Genomic perspectives on the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition in Ireland</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="18_Chapter12.xhtml#ch12">12. Ancient DNA and modelling the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition in Britain and Ireland</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="19_Chapter13.xhtml#ch13">13. Looking back, looking forward – humanity beyond biology</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</div>


  </div>
  

  <div class="calibreEbNav">
    
      <a href="17_Chapter11.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
    

    <a href="../../0uxpbel6.html" class="calibreAHome">start
</a>

    
      <a href="19_Chapter13.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
    
  </div>

</div>

</body>
</html>
