<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>

    <title>Ancient DNA and the European Neolithic</title>
    <meta content="urn:uuid:7a42176f-8084-4cc5-b941-35f2c3610079" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../page_styles.css"/>

  


<link href="../calibreHtmlOutBasicCss.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

</head>
<body>

<div class="calibreMeta">
  <div class="calibreMetaTitle">
  
  
    
    <h1>
      <a href="../../0uxpbel6.html">Ancient DNA and the European Neolithic
</a>
    </h1>
    
    
  
  </div>
  <div class="calibreMetaAuthor">
    Alasdair Whittle;Joshua Pollard;Susan Greaney;

  </div>
</div>

<div class="calibreMain">

  <div class="calibreEbookContent">
    
      <div class="calibreEbNavTop">
        
          <a href="03_Foreword.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
        

        
          <a href="05_Contents.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
        
      </div>
    

    
<div id="Neolithic" class="calibre2">
<p class="fmtitle"><a id="page_iii" class="calibre3"></a><span class="italic1">Neolithic Studies Group Seminar Papers</span></p>
<p class="linef"/>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">1.</span> Neolithic Houses in North-West Europe and Beyond</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Timothy Darvill and Julian Thomas</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">2.</span> Neolithic Landscapes</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Peter Topping</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">3.</span> Grooved Ware in Britain and Ireland</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Rosamund Cleal and Ann MacSween</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">4.</span> Pathways and Ceremonies: The Cursus Monuments of Britain and Ireland</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Alistair Barclay and Jan Harding</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">5.</span> Plants in Neolithic Britain and Beyond</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Andrew S. Fairbairn</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">6.</span> Neolithic Enclosures in Atlantic Northwest Europe</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Timothy Darvill and Julian Thomas</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">7.</span> Animals in the Neolithic of Britain and Europe</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Dale Serjeantson and David Field</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">8.</span> Neolithic Archaeology in the Intertidal Zone</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Jane Sidell and Fiona Haughey</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">9.</span> Defining a Regional Neolithic: Evidence from Britain and Ireland</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Kenneth Brophy and Gordon Barclay</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">10.</span> Round Mounds and Monumentality in the British Neolithic and Beyond</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Jim Leary, Timothy Darvill and David Field</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">11.</span> Flint and Stone in the Neolithic Period</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Alan Saville</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">12.</span> Regional Perspectives on Neolithic Pit Deposition: Beyond the Mundane</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Hugo Lamdin-Whymark &amp; Julian Thomas</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">13.</span> Visualising the Neolithic</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Andrew Cochrane &amp; Andy Meirion Jones</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">14.</span> Moving on in Neolithic Studies</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Jim Leary and Thomas Kador</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">15.</span> Neolithic Bodies</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Penny Bickle and Emilie Sibbesson</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">16.</span> Mining and Quarrying in Neolithic Europe</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Anne Teather, Peter Topping and Jon Baczkowski</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">17.</span> Houses of the Dead?</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Alistair Barclay, David Field and Jim Leary</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">18.</span> Marking Place: New Perspectives on Early Neolithic Enclosures</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Jonathan Last</span></p>
<p class="num"><span class="num1">19.</span> Ancient DNA and the European Neolithic: Relations and Descent</p>
<p class="num2"><span class="italic">edited by Alasdair Whittle, Joshua Pollard and Susan Greaney</span></p>
</div>



  </div>

  
  <div class="calibreToc">
    <h2><a href="../../0uxpbel6.html">Table of contents
</a></h2>
    <div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="00_Cover.xhtml">Front Cover</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="00a_Half.xhtml#Half">Half-Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="01_Title.xhtml">Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="02_Copyright.xhtml">Copyright Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="05_Contents.xhtml">Contents</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="03_Foreword.xhtml">Foreword</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="06_Contributors.xhtml">List of contributors</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="07_Chapter01.xhtml#ch1">1. Introduction: questions of descent, relationships and identity</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="08_Chapter02.xhtml#ch2">2. Living with archaeogenetics: three decades on</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="09_Chapter03.xhtml#ch3">3. Five challenges for an integrated archaeogenetic paradigm</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="10_Chapter04.xhtml#ch4">4. Ancient genomics methodology and genetic insularity in Neolithic Europe</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="11_Chapter05.xhtml#ch5">5. Reconstructing the genealogical relationships of hunter-gatherers and farmers</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="12_Chapter06.xhtml#ch6">6. Ancient DNA of Near Eastern Neolithic populations: the knowns and the unknowns</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="13_Chapter07.xhtml#ch7">7. Farmer-forager interactions in the Iron Gates: new insights and new dilemmas</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="14_Chapter08.xhtml#ch8">8. A glance at early Neolithic south-east and central Europe – as reflected by archaeological and archaeogenetic data</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="15_Chapter09.xhtml#ch9">9. Ancestry and identity in the Balkans and the Carpathian basin between the 5th and 3rd millennia cal BC</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="16_Chapter10.xhtml#ch10">10. The genetics of the inhabitants of Neolithic Britain: a review</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="17_Chapter11.xhtml#ch11">11. Islands apart? Genomic perspectives on the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition in Ireland</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="18_Chapter12.xhtml#ch12">12. Ancient DNA and modelling the Mesolithic–Neolithic transition in Britain and Ireland</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="19_Chapter13.xhtml#ch13">13. Looking back, looking forward – humanity beyond biology</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</div>


  </div>
  

  <div class="calibreEbNav">
    
      <a href="03_Foreword.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page
</a>
    

    <a href="../../0uxpbel6.html" class="calibreAHome">start
</a>

    
      <a href="05_Contents.xhtml" class="calibreANext">next page
</a>
    
  </div>

</div>

</body>
</html>
